[*16* The Socialist Economy Is a Planned Economy](#) 
=======================================================================================

[Planned and Proportional Development of the National
Economy](#)<a id="s_a">[\*](#bot_s_a)</a>

Any social production involves a problem of regulating social labor,
that is, the allocation of manpower (live labor) and material resources
(embodied labor) among various production sectors. The regulation of
social labor and production follows certain laws. To correctly identify
and make use of the economic law regulating socialist production and to
differentiate it from the economic law regulating capitalist production
is very important for the development of socialist production with
greater, faster, and better results at lower costs.

[The Law of Planned Development Regulates Socialist Production](#)</a>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Law of Planned Development Is the Opposite of the Law of Competition and Chaotic Production

In any large-scale social production, there exist close relations of
mutual dependence among various production departments. For example, the
textile industry needs agriculture to supply cotton and the
machine-building industry to supply spinning and weaving machines; the
machine-building industry needs the iron and steel industry to supply a
variety of rolled steel; and the iron and steel industry needs the coal
industry to supply raw coal and the machine-building industry to supply
extracting and digging machines, refining equipment, rolling equipment,
and so forth. All these industrial and mining enterprises need
agriculture to supply the means of living, the power industry to supply
electricity, and the communications and transportation departments to
transport raw materials and finished goods for them. These relations of
mutual dependence among various departments and enterprises demand that
they maintain proper proportions among themselves and supply what they
produce to others to satisfy each other's needs. Otherwise, social
production will be obstructed or even disrupted.

The capitalist society is a society with a high degree of social
production. What regulates the allocation of social labor among various
production departments in this society? It is regulated by the law of
competition and chaotic production and the law of value. The purpose of
capitalist production is not to satisfy social needs but to realize
value-augmentation to obtain profit. To go after bigger profits, the
capitalists are engaged in a life-and-death struggle among themselves.
Like flies going after filth, the capitalist shifts his capital around
in response to the spontaneous movements of market prices to expand
commodity production first in this and then in that department. Under
these conditions, the required proportional relations among production
departments are often violated. Only after spontaneous adjustments
through the destruction of production capacities can the violated
proportional relations be temporarily restored. Lenin's statement that
"capitalism must establish a balance which is regularly violated through
crises" <a id="1">[[1]](#bot_1)</a> exactly
describes this situation.

After the socialist system replaces the capitalist system, economic
conditions are fundamentally changed. Socialist production is based on a
public ownership system of the means of production, and its purpose is
to satisfy the needs of the socialist state and the whole
laboring people. Under the socialist system, on the one hand, social
production is further developed. It is all the more necessary to
allocate social labor according to certain proportions and to maintain a
proper balance among various production departments. On the other hand,
the socialist public ownership system of the means of production turns
the laboring people into the masters of production. Their basic
interests are identical. This eliminates the conflicts of interest among
various departments and enterprises which are inherent in capitalism.
Thus, the socialist state, which represents the interests of the
proletariat and the whole laboring people, can allocate labor power and
the means of production among various departments of the national
economy under a unified plan in accordance with the needs of the state
and the people to enable the various departments of the national economy
to develop in a proportional and balanced manner. It is exactly these
economic conditions relied on by socialist production that eliminate the
law of competition and chaotic production from the historical stage and
render the law of value useless in regulating social production. They
also give rise to a new economic law, namely, the law of planned
development of the national economy, to regulate social production and
the development of the whole national economy. These inevitable changes
after the replacement of capitalism by socialism were foreseen
scientifically by Engels. He once pointed out, "Once society possesses
the means of production, ...the internal chaotic conditions in social
production will be replaced by planned and conscious organization."
<a id="2">[[2]](#bot_2)</a>

### The Planned Economy Demonstrates the Superiority of the Socialist System

The replacement of competition and chaotic production by a planned
development of the national economy is an important aspect of the
superiority of socialism over capitalism.

The socialist planned economy indicates the beginning of man consciously
creating his own history. In the capitalist society characterized by
competition and chaotic production, things rule man, rather
than man ruling things. The laborer cannot control his own fate; nor can
the capitalist free himself from the blind manipulation of those
objective economic laws that operate behind people's backs. In socialist
society, the system of public ownership of the means of production has
been realized, and the laboring people have become masters of society.
They control their own fate and consciously begin to make use of the
objective law to create their own history. These conscious activities to
create history are manifested in the process of practice as gradually
identifying the objective law, formulating plans based on the objective
law to transform Nature and society, and realizing anticipated results
through organized activities. Chairman Mao hailed the conscious
activities of China's laboring people to transform the world under the
leadership of the Party and pointed out: "Human development has been
going on for hundreds of thousands of years. In China, the conditions
for a planned development of her own economy and culture have been
obtained just now. With these conditions, the outlook of China will
change year after year. There will be a greater change every five years.
An even greater change will occur after several five-year periods."
<a id="3">[[3]](#bot_3)</a>

The superiority of the socialist planned economy over capitalist
competition and chaotic production does not lie in its guarantee that
the proportional relations among various production sectors can be
absolutely balanced all the time. There is nothing in the world that can
develop in an absolutely balanced manner. In the development process of
the socialist economy, balance is only temporary and relative. Imbalance
is permanent and absolute. Because of the ever-changing conditions
between the advanced and the backward among various enterprises, various
sectors, and various regions, the obstruction and disruption of
bourgeois influence, the change in natural conditions, the limitation of
people's understanding of objective things, and so forth, conditions in
which balance and the proportional relations are upset will still arise
regularly. But, in socialist society, this kind of imbalance among
various production sectors can be overcome continually through people's
conscious activities and regulation by the socialist state plan.
Compared with the blind groping associated with competition
and chaotic production, the continual overcoming of imbalance and the
establishment of relative balance through regulation by plans permits
the prevention of much wasted manpower, material resources, and funds so
as to achieve a more rational and full utilization of social labor and
to guarantee a rapid development of socialist production. Chairman Mao
pointed out: "The objective, longterm existence of the contradictions
between social production and social needs requires the people to
regulate them frequently through state plans. In China, there is an
annual plan which arranges for a proper proportion between accumulation
and consumption in order to achieve a balance between production and
needs. Here, balance refers to a temporary and relative unity of
contradictions. After one year, speaking as a whole, this balance is
upset by the struggle within contradictions, and this unity is changed.
Balance turns into imbalance; unity becomes disunity. A second year's
balance and unity are required."
<a id="4">[[4]](#bot_4)</a> Those viewpoints
which regard the planned development of the socialist economy as being
free from contradictions and as balanced development are metaphysical.
The correct attitude should be to conduct scientific analysis of
imbalances in the national economy to find out their different
conditions and to prescribe treatment accordingly. After the appearance
of imbalance, we must treat it with a constructive attitude. We cannot
rigidly pull down the high to suit the low. Instead, we must in good
time pull up the backward sectors to establish a new balance according
to the needs and possibilities. Thus, the change from balance to
imbalance and from imbalance to balance in the development process of
the socialist economy implies the breaking down of the old proportional
relations and the establishment of new proportional relations at a
higher level of development. This is precisely the concrete
manifestation of the superiority of the socialist economy.

### The Proportional Relations in the National Economy Must Be Handled Correctly

The socialist economy requires people to regulate the various mutually
dependent sectors in the national economy with plans in
order to make them develop proportionally. What then are the objective
proportional relations among the various sectors of the national
economy?

Proportional relations in the national economy are numerous and complex.
The main proportional relations are as follows:

First, the proportions between agriculture and industry. Agriculture and
industry are the two basic mutually dependent production sectors. The
staff and workers of the industrial sector require agriculture to supply
them with food grains and various nonstaple foods. Light industry
requires agriculture to supply it with raw materials. Both light and
heavy industry need the agricultural sector as an important market for
their products. On the other hand, the rural population needs industry
to supply industrial products for daily use. Agricultural production
needs industry to supply it with chemical fertilizers, insecticide,
agricultural machinery, electricity, and other means of production. That
part of the agricultural products not retained by the agricultural
sector also needs industry and the urban population as a market. Because
of the existence of these mutually dependent relations between
agriculture and industry and because the relations between industry and
agriculture are, in fact, relations between the worker and the peasant
and between the state ownership system and the collective ownership
system, it is a key issue in a planned development of the national
economy to maintain a proper proportion between industry and agriculture
in order to make them promote one another in the development process of
the socialist economy. This issue will be discussed in greater detail in
the next chapter.

Second, the proportions within agriculture. This includes the
proportions among agriculture (crop growing), forestry, animal
husbandry, sideline production, and fishery, as well as the proportions
among food grain, cotton, vegetable oil, bast fibers, silk, tea, sugar,
vegetables, fruit, herbal medicines, and miscellaneous foodstuffs within
crop growing itself. In the whole of agricultural production, the
production of food grains occupies the most important position.
Therefore, food grains must be insisted on as the key link when the
proportional relations within agriculture are handled. The
development of cash crops, forestry, animal husbandry, sideline
production, and fishery cannot be divorced from the key link of food
grains. However, this does not imply that the development of other items
of agricultural production can be neglected. Take forestry as an
example; it not only directly supplies products to society, but also
serves an important function in conserving water and soil. "Without
trees on the mountain, water and soil cannot be retained; having a lot
of trees on the mountain is as good as building dams." The importance of
forestry to agricultural development can thus be seen. The development
of animal husbandry, sideline production, fishery, and cash crops cannot
be neglected either. The development of forestry, animal husbandry,
sideline production, and fishery is vital to national construction and
the people's living. It can also promote the further development of food
grain production by accumulating capital funds and increasing
fertilizers. The policy "take food grains as the key link and ensure an
all-round development" formulated by Chairman Mao pointed out a
direction for the correct handling of the proportional relations within
agriculture. This policy requires, under the precondition of taking food
grains as the key link, a consideration of the characteristics of
different regions and an overall arrangement for agriculture, forestry,
animal husbandry, sideline production, and fishery as well as food
grain, cotton, oil, bast fibers, silk, tea, and so forth in order to
make them promote one another and develop as a whole.

Third, the proportions within industry. These include the proportions
between light and heavy industry, the raw materials industry and the
processing industry, national defense industry and foundation industry
as well as the proportions between major machines and minor machines and
between whole machines and spare parts within various industries. The
proportional relations within industry are even more complex than the
proportional relations within agriculture. But in the complex relations,
there is still a key link. This key link is steel. With steel, we can
make machines, and with machines, we can develop various industries.
This key role of steel in industry reflects a major aspect
of the proportional relations within industry and illustrates that the
development of the various sectors of industry must be based on the
development of the iron and steel industry. In addition, other
proportional relations must also be correctly handled. In the
relationship between heavy and light industry, we must not neglect light
industry when we give priority to the development of heavy industry. In
the relationship between the raw materials industry and the processing
industry, the leading aspect of the contradiction is the raw materials
industry. To develop the raw materials industry, especially the mining
industry which is of decisive significance in the raw materials
industry, it is important to unfold socialist construction through
independence and self-reliance and to maintain a balance between the raw
materials industry and the processing industry. In the relationship
between national defense industry and foundation industry, priority must
be given to the development of foundation industries. Without the
development of such foundation industries as the metallurgical industry,
chemical industry, machine-building industry, electronic instruments and
meters industry, and so forth, national defense industry cannot go very
far. Only by closely linking the development of national defense
industry with the development of foundation industry and by maintaining
a relative balance between national defense industry and foundation
industry can national defense industry and industry as a whole be
developed faster. In the relationships between major and minor machines
and between whole machines and spare parts within industry, it must be
noted that without the complement of minor machines, major machines
simply cannot operate. With whole machines but without spare parts,
whole machines have to stop operation once some parts are worn out.
Therefore, we must overcome the tendency of emphasizing major machines
at the expense of minor machines and whole machines at the expense of
spare parts in order to maintain a proper proportion.

The proportional relations within industry, within agriculture, and
between agriculture and industry are three very important proportional
relations in the whole national economy. This is because
among the economic links of production, exchange, distribution, and
consumption, production is the determining link. And agriculture and
industry are also basic production sectors. Agriculture and light
industry basically produce means of livelihood. And heavy industry
basically produces means of production. Once these three proportional
relations are properly handled, the proportional relation between the
two categories of social production (means of production and means of
consumption) is basically arranged.

Fourth, the proportions between industrial and agricultural production
and the communications and transportation industry. Marx classified the
transportation industry as the fourth material production sector, coming
after the extractive industry, the processing industry, and agriculture.
Large-scale social production requires that the various sectors and
enterprises receive their supply of raw materials, processed materials,
and fuel in good time and that they ship their products to points of
consumption in good time. Without a corresponding development in the
communications and transportation industry, industrial and agricultural
production will be greatly hindered.

Fifth, the proportion between cultural and educational construction and
economic construction. Cultural and educational construction serve
economic construction. Economic construction also promotes and restricts
the development of cultural and educational enterprises. To construct a
socialist country with modern agriculture, industry, and national
defense, the development of modern science and culture is indispensable.
The development of economic construction requires a corresponding
development of cultural and educational construction in order to
facilitate the continual supply of educated laborers who have a
socialist consciousness.

Sixth, the proportions between increases in production and the
development of cultural and educational enterprises and increases in
population. A planned development of goods production and cultural and
educational enterprises objectively requires a planned increase in
population, namely, family planning. Family planning is not only a basic
precondition for the reproduction of labor power, but also
a necessary condition for a planned arrangement of people's livelihood,
the protection of the health of the mother and the baby, and a planned
development of socialist construction. Blind population increase will
certainly interfere with a planned and proportional development of the
national economy. In capitalist society, population propagation is as
chaotic as the production of things. Family planning applied over the
whole society is inconceivable. Only under the condition in which the
proletariat and the laboring people are the masters can it be possible
to have a planned regulation of population increase simultaneously with
a planned regulation of goods production. Family planning is a result of
having the proletariat control its own destiny and is a manifestation of
the superiority of the socialist system.

Seventh, the proportional relations between accumulation and
consumption. Because socialist products possess varying degrees of
commodity characteristics, in addition to the abovementioned primarily
material proportional relations, there exists a proportional
relationship based on value between accumlation and consumption. If this
proportional relationship is not properly handled, the development of
the whole national economy will be hindered. This problem will be
discussed in greater detail in [Chapter 20](#).

Finally, the proportional relations among various regions, namely, the
rational distribution of production capacities. The socialist society
develops from the capitalist society. Distribution of production
capacities in the capitalist society is formed under competition and
chaotic production and embodies many irrational factors. Take the
example of the early period after liberation in China in which the total
value of industrial production in the seven provinces and two
municipalities along the coast accounted for 73 percent of the total
value of national industrial production. In the iron and steel industry,
80 percent of its production capacity was distributed along the coast.
There was almost no iron and steel industry in Inner Mongolia, the
northwest, or the southwest where material reserves were abundant. In
the textile industry, more than 80 percent of the spindles
and more than 90 percent of the weaving machines were distributed along
the coast. There were very few textile factories in the cotton-producing
area and the interior. Therefore, after the proletariat seized political
power, it faced the task of geographically reallocating production
capacities. A rational geographic distribution of production capacities
must be such that it is conducive to consolidating and strengthening
national defense against possible aggression and threats from
imperialism. It must be favorable to strengthening the unity among the
laboring people of various nationalities, to utilizing various resources
in the most rational manner, and to building socialism with greater,
faster, and better results at lower costs. The key issue in a rational
distribution of production capacities is to achieve "a distribution of
large industries over the whole country with the highest possible degree
of balance." <a id="5">[[5]](#bot_5)</a> In the
more than twenty years after the establishment of the Republic and under
the guidance of Chairman Mao's theory on the correct handling of the
relations between maritime industry and interior industry, China's
interior industry has developed rapidly. The newly established
industrial bases are beginning to take shape. Former industrial bases in
the provinces and municipalities along the coast have also been fully
utilized and rationally developed.

[The Law of Value Still Affects Socialist Production](#)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Planning Is Primary, and Pricing Secondary

Socialist production is direct social production, and yet, to a certain
extent, it is also commodity production. As commodity production, it has
its own laws of operation. "Wherever there are commodities and commodity
production, the law of value prevails."
<a id="6">[[6]](#bot_6)</a> Thus, both the law
of planned development of the national economy and the law of value
govern socialist production.

The substance of the law of value is: (1) the value of commodities is
determined by the socially necessary labor time expended on
their production; (2) commodity exchange must be based on equivalent
values. These objective requirements of the law of value will assume
different forms and produce different effects on production under
different social systems.

Under the capitalist system, social production is carried on under
competition and chaotic production conditions. The price of commodities
fluctuates with the change in the supply-demand relationship. Sometimes
it is higher than the production price and sometimes, lower. When the
price is higher than the production price, profit is higher than the
average profit. When the capitalist sees this opportunity for higher
profit, he is happy to invest his capital in these sectors. In the
opposite situation, capital will be withdrawn. It is under these blind
conditions that social production develops. These conditions demonstrate
that the law of value is manifested as an alien force working behind
people's backs under the capitalist system and is the total regulator of
social production.

Under the socialist system, social production is carried on in a planned
manner. Prices are based on values and are determined by the state in a
unified manner. Prices no longer fluctuate with the change in the
supply-demand relationship. The law of value is no longer an alien force
governing people. Basically speaking, it is consciously used by people
to serve socialist construction. Furthermore, the effects of the law of
value on social production have been greatly restricted. Their concrete
manifestations are as follows:

First, production in the socialist state enterprise is not subject to
fluctuations according to the level of prices and the size of profit. It
is not regulated by the law of value, but rather by the national
economic plan formulated according to the requirements of the basic
economic law of socialism and the law of planned development of the
national economy. Based on the needs of the state and the people, the
state plan decides what and how much to produce, and the state
enterprise must thoroughly carry this out. The enterprise must produce
according to the plan regardless of profit. The loss is then made up by
planned subsidies. If the leadership of an enterprise disobeys
the stipulations of the plan and expands production of
highly profitable products of its own accord, it will violate the
requirements of the basic economic law of socialism and the law of
planned development of the national economy and go astray on the
capitalist road.

Second, production in socialist rural collective enterprises is also
carried out under the guidance of the state plan. Unlike the state
enterprise, the collective enterprise is an economic unit responsible
for its own profit and loss. The level of product prices and the size of
income directly affect the accumulation of the collective and the income
of its members. Other conditions being equal, the collective enterprise
generally tends to be willing to produce more of those products which
have low costs and command high economic income. In this respect, the
law of value affects the production of the collective enterprise more
than that of the state enterprise. However, the area sown for food
grains, cotton, vegetable oil, and other major crops is decided by the
state plan. The collective economy cannot arbitrarily expand the sown
area of those crops commanding a higher income. It can only increase the
per-unit-area yield of these crops within the sown area specified by the
state through more intensive farming, more fertilizers, and better
management. Therefore, as for the production of major products in the
rural collective economy, the regulating role of decisive importance is
still the law of planned development of the national economy. The law of
value merely plays a secondary role. Only for products which are not
important to the state and the people, not included in the state plan,
nor procured through contracts are the level of prices and the size of
income of greater importance. Products which command a higher revenue
develop easily, while products which command a lower revenue develop
only with great difficulty. The law of value performs a certain
regulating role only with regard to these products.

As far as the whole of socialist production is concerned, the plan is
primary, and the price is secondary. This is to say, in the allocation
of social labor among various production sectors, what and how much to
produce are regulated by the state plan which reflects the
requirements of the basic law of socialism and the law of planned
development of the national economy. The state plan plays a primary and
decisive role. The law of value is still useful, but it plays only a
secondary and supportive role.

### The Law of Value Is a Great School

In socialist production, not only are the form and degree of effect of
the law of value different from those applicable to capitalist
production, but the social consequences are also different.

Under the capitalist system, blind regulation of production by the law
of value, on the one hand, promotes advances of production technology.
On the other hand, it inevitably leads to an immense waste of social
wealth and mass bankruptcy among the medium and small enterprises, and
intensifies class contradictions in capitalist society.

Under the socialist system, the proletarian party and the socialist
state are capable of identifying the objective role of the law of value
and can make use of its constructive effects on socialist production and
restrict or eliminate its negative effects.

In the development process of socialist production, the direction of the
effects exerted by the law of value and the law of planned development
of the national economy is sometimes identical. For example, the law of
planned development of the national economy requires the acceleration of
production of certain cash crops to meet the demand for raw materials
due to a rapid development of some light industries. The prices of these
cash crops can also guarantee a reasonable income to the agricultural
collective economy. Under these conditions, the state plan's
requirements for increased production are identical to the requirements
of the agricultural collective economy for increased production and
increased income. The plan for increased production can generally be
fulfilled or overfulfilled. However, the direction of the effects
exerted by these two effects can be different. With regard to the
comparative price relations between food grain crops and cash crops and
among various cash crops within agricultural production, the prices of
some cash crops can bring a relatively higher income to the
collective economy than the prices of other cash crops. If the law of
value is permitted to influence production, it will be detrimental to
the requirement of the national economic plan that there be an overall
increase in production of all crops but in varying degrees for different
crops. Thus we can see that when the effects of the two laws are
identical, the law of value plays a constructive role in fulfilling the
state plan. But when the effects of the two laws are not identical, the
law of value disrupts the fulfillment of the state plan and plays a
negative role. The so-called conscious use of the law of value means
that the role of the law of value must be comprehensively understood and
that through political and ideological work, arrangement of the state
plan, and price policy, the positive role of the law of value will be
played and its negative role will be curtailed so that its effects on
socialist production will be conducive to fulfilling the state plan. Our
Party and government have consistently emphasized socialist education of
the peasant and planned leadership of agricultural production. At the
same time, they have also paid attention to the rational arrangement of
the purchasing prices of agricultural and sideline products and to the
comparative price relationships among various agricultural and sideline
products and have struggled hard to be able both to satisfy the state's
need for agricultural and sideline products and to promote the
development of commune and brigade production and the elevation of the
commune members' income, thus correctly handling the interests of the
state, the collective, and the individual.

The conscious exercise of the law of value by the socialist country to
promote socialist production is also manifested in its use in the system
of economic accounting tp carry through the policy of running an
enterprise with industry and frugality. Based on the requirement of the
law of value, the socialist country charges the same price for identical
products according to the average social expenditure in producing the
product. But because of different conditions in production technology
and different levels of management and operation, the individual labor
expended on the same product in different enterprises may
differ. The individual expenditure in enterprises which are experienced
in mobilizing the masses, continually updating production technology,
and lowering costs by careful and detailed calculation may be lower than
the average social expenditure. They can thus fulfill and overfulfill
the plan targets assigned by the state and occupy an advanced position.
Conversely, enterprises which are careless, wasteful, conservative, and
inefficient in mobilizing the masses to transform their backward
technological conditions may have individual labor expenditures which
are higher than the average social expenditure. They cannot fulfill the
plan targets assigned to them by the state and occupy a backward
position. Therefore, the unified prices set by the socialist state,
making use of the law of value, are conducive to exposing the
contradictions of various enterprises in operation and management and
discovering the disparities between the advanced and the backward in
order to press various enterprises continually to improve their
operation and management, lower their production costs and carry through
the policy of running an enterprise with industry and frugality.

The correct application of the law of value can teach us: to follow the
requirements of the law of value to set prices rationally; to organize
production rationally using the influence of the law of value; to
calculate precisely the volume of production and tap production
potentials based on actual conditions; and to improve production
methods, lower production costs, and implement economic accounting
continually. These positive roles demonstrate that the law of value is a
great school. Stalin observed: "This is a very good practical school. It
promotes the rapid growth of our cadres in economic work so they become
real leaders in the socialist production of the present stage."
<a id="7">[[7]](#bot_7)</a>

In socialist society, the proletariat wants to make use of the law of
value to promote the development of socialist construction while the
bourgeoisie tries hard to use the law of value to set up free markets
and disrupt socialist construction. The Liu Shao-ch'i and Lin Piao
clique tried hard to exaggerate the role of the law of value. They
emphasized the "almighty nature" of the law of value and
advocated the law of value as a regulator of social production. In their
capitalist restoration, the Soviet revisionist renegade clique has
flagrantly used the law of value as "an objective regulator of socialist
social production." It has also launched a "new economic system"
centering on putting profit in command and having material incentives in
accordance with this revisionist theory. Even though the measures taken
by the internal and external revisionists are sometimes different, their
purpose is the same, namely, to disrupt socialist construction and
restore capitalism. The experience reflected in the struggles between
the two lines with respect to the question of the law of value tells us
that it is necessary to draw a demarcation line between Marxism and
revisionism and firmly adhere to the socialist road if the law of value
is to correctly serve socialist production. We should never be careless;
otherwise we will lose our way.

[The National Economic Plan Must Correctly Reflect Objective Laws](#)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Work on the National Economic Plan Must Reflect the Requirements of Objective Laws

The law of planned development of the national economy and the law of
value are both economic laws that objectively exist in socialist
society. The roles of these laws are realized basically through their
conscious application. The national economic plan of the socialist state
is a form of conscious application of these laws. Work on the national
economic plan includes research, formulation, implementation,
inspection, adjustment, and summation. Without the work on the national
economic plan, it is impossible to realize a proportional development of
the socialist national economy. Of course, even if people do not
consciously apply them, the law of planned development of the national
economy and the law of value will eventually prevail. For example, if
the economic leadership organs did not seriously investigate and study,
did not respect the objective requirements of the law of
planned development, or formulated the proportions carelessly or if they
formulated the price plan without considering the requirements of the
law of value and set prices arbitrarily such that the socially necessary
expenditure of some production departments was not compensated and
production could not be continued, then various dislocations would
appear in mutually dependent departments. These phenomena would teach
people by negative example to respect these laws and to reflect the
requirements of these laws by strengthening and improving the work on
the national economic plan.

An important link in the work on the national economic plan is the
formulation of plans. Plans are formulated by people and are products of
ideology. Ideology is a reflection of reality and also interacts with
reality. A correct plan promotes a rapid development of the socialist
economy. An incorrect plan hinders the development of the socialist
economy.

If the national economic plan is to be correct, it is necessary first of
all for the people to reflect the objective requirements of the law of
planned development in all its aspects in the formulation process of the
plan. This is by no means easy. In socialist society, the bourgeoisie
and all exploitative classes always try hard to disrupt and interfere
with the planned development of the national economy by various means
and make it difficult for the proletariat to understand this law. The
whole national economy appears to be a complex entity full of
contradictions. Imbalances continually pop up and are resolved and then
pop up again. Objective conditions are highly changeable. It is not easy
for the subjective to correctly reflect the objective. But this is not
to say that the proportional relations in the national economy cannot be
identified. Provided that we continually sum up experience,
penetratingly investigate and study, seriously analyze, rely on the
masses, and do meticulous work, it is entirely possible to gradually
identify the law and make the national economic plan more accurately
reflect the requirements of planned development.

The law of planned development of the national economy merely requires
that harmonious proportional relations be maintained among
interdependent sectors in the development process. It does not point out
for us the direction and duties of socialist economic development. It is
the basic economic law of socialism that points out the basic direction
and the duties for socialist economic development. Therefore, an
accurate national economic plan must correctly reflect not only the
requirements of the law of development, but also the requirements of the
basic economic law of socialism in its various aspects. The national
economic plan which reflects the requirements of these objective laws
embodies the interests of the proletariat and the whole laboring people.
It is the Party program for economic construction and must be seriously
treated and resolutely implemented.

### Overall Balance Is the Basic Method in Planning Work

In the work on the national economic plan, it is important to master
overall balance. Overall balance is not balance within individual
sectors. It is balance in agriculture, balance in industry, and balance
between industry and agriculture. Overall balance is the basic method in
a planned economy.

The task of overall balance lies mainly in the arrangement of
proportional relations in the national economy. In accordance with the
major tasks of the state in the planning period, it properly allocates
manpower, material resources, and finance to various sectors of the
national economy and establishes a balance between social production and
social needs so that the growth of production of the means of production
corresponds to the needs of the ever-developing socialist production and
so that the growth of production in the means of consumption conforms to
the needs arising from the gradual improvement of the people's
livelihood.

The process of overall balance is a process of exposing, analyzing, and
resolving contradictions. To do a good job in overall balance, we must
handle contradictions with a positive attitude, energetically promote
production of short-range products
<a id="8">[[8]](#bot_8)</a>, and
accelerate the development of key sectors in the national economy that
are temporarily backward so that a new balance can be established on a
new and higher level. Only in this way can national defense
construction, capital construction, and the needs of the people's
livelihood be better safeguarded. To oppose Chairman Mao's proletarian
revolutionary line, the Liu Shao-ch'i clique sometimes suggested
so-called "short-run balance" and practiced negative balance in a big
way to pull down the high to suit the low. Sometimes they set targets so
high that they were not feasible. When these targets could not be
reached, they resorted to "total retreats." They pushed a Right
opportunist line in planning work that was "Left" in form but Right in
substance.

Overall balance is the establishment of a balance in the whole national
economy. But it is not an even application of force without
differentiating what is more and less important. If two hands had to
catch ten fish at one time, the result would be that no fish could be
caught. In the complex proportional relations of the whole national
economy, there are the more and the less important, the dominant and the
subordinate. To achieve overall balance, we must differentiate the more
and less important and guarantee to take care of the key points. We must
first guarantee the satisfaction of the needs of the leading links and
the key sectors in the development of the national economy. In
formulating a plan for capital construction, the principle of
concentrating forces to fight a battle of annihilation must be
impiemented. If we start from departmentalism, pay no attention to what
is more important and what is less important, concentrate on too many
items, and spread the limited manpower, material resources, and funds
thinly over a long battlefront, then our forces will be dispersed, and
the early completion and operation of many key items will inevitably be
affected. Of course, safeguarding the key points does not mean
neglecting ordinary things. There are close complementary relations
between the key points and ordinary things. Ordinary things will not
develop properly if we neglect the key points. But if we neglect
ordinary things, the development of the key points will also be
affected. Therefore, under the precondition of taking care of the key
points, we must also pay attention to ordinary things. We
must start from the whole and consider all vertical and horizontal
relations in order to avoid the error of partiality.

In overall balance work, attention must be paid to the balance of labor,
materials, and funds. People are the most important factor in the
productive forces; so of the three, the balance of labor must be
arranged first. In conformity with the principle that agriculture is the
foundation of the national economy, sufficient labor must first be
secured for agriculture. Laborers will be transferred from agriculture
to industry or other sectors of the national economy only when the
development of agricultural production and agricultural mechanization
enables the rural areas to succeed in providing surplus labor power and
more marketable grain and commodity crops. If we depart from this
prerequisite and transfer too much labor power away from agriculture, it
will disrupt the overall balance and be unfavorable to the rapid,
planned, and proportional development of the national economy.

There is an inevitable process between the appearance of imbalances
among various sectors of the national economy and the establishment of a
new balance. To guarantee a proportional development among various
sectors, it is necessary to establish and maintain a certain amount of
material reserves. The amount of material reserves of various kinds must
be appropriate. If the reserves are too low, they cannot satisfy the
needs for filling the gap between two relative balances. As a result,
some sectors will have to work below capacity because of a shortage in
certain material resources, and this will affect the rapid development
of the national economy. If the material reserves are so high as to
exceed the need for filling a temporary shortage, then material
resources which could have been used for current production will not be
available, and this will also adversely affect the rapid development of
the national economy.

### Follow the Basic Principles of Planning Work

To do a good job in planning work, in addition to the use of the basic
method of overall balance, it is also necessary to follow some basic
principles derived from the practical experience of planning work.

Planning work must mobilize central as well as local
activism and must combine central, unified leadership with the exercise
of local activism.

To formulate and carry through a unified national economic plan, it is
necessary to have a highly centralized and unified leadership. In
national economic planning work, there can be no unified national
economic plan if there is no central unified leadership and if the
viewpoint of the whole situation is not promoted and excessive
decentralization is not opposed so that every local unit can make its
own plans. However, socialist centralized leadership is built on a wide
foundation of democracy. Central unified leadership must be combined
with local activism. In formulating a national economic plan, the
central departments concerned must find out what the local opinion is,
consult with the local units, and formulate plans with the local units.
In implementing the plan, it is also necessary to allow exceptions for
local conditions. These exceptions are not excuses for creating
independent kingdoms, but are necessary allowances that suit the
interests of the whole, permit full tapping of production potentials in
accordance with local conditions, and facilitate a better fulfillment of
the national economic plan. As for the system of planning work, it is
necessary to implement a system with a unified plan and administration
by different levels. Chairman Mao pointed out early in the establishment
of the People's Republic of China: "What should be unified must be
unified. Excessive decentralization cannot be permitted. But it is
necessary to combine unification with local adaptations."
<a id="9">[[9]](#bot_9)</a> Later, Chairman
Mao taught us more than once to exercise local activism more often in
handling the relations between the center and the local units. Under a
central, unified plan, the local units should be allowed to do more.
Following Chairman Mao's teachings, the broad people of the country
criticized and repudiated the "dictatorship by regulations" fostered by
the Liu Shao-ch'i clique that stifled local activism, and they better
exercised central and local activism in plan management work, thus
promoting the rapid, planned, and proportional development of China's
socialist economy.

Chairman Mao remarked, "When the plan is being formulated,
it is necessary to mobilize the masses and to leave leeway."
<a id="10">[[10]](#bot_10)</a> This is a very
important principle in national economic planning work.

In socialist construction, the mass line must be followed whatever the
work may be. Mass movements must be launched in a big way. Planning work
must also follow the mass line. The masses must be mobilized to talk
about lines, expose contradictions, uncover disparities, and accelerate
changes. If the plan targets are not discussed by the masses, they are
the ideas of the cadre. Only after the plans are discussed by the masses
do they become the plans of the masses. Only then will the plan targets
be both advanced and reliable and will the activism of the broad masses
be fully mobilized.

Plan targets should be advanced. Only an advanced plan can embody the
superiority of the socialist system, and only an advanced plan can
heighten morale. To formulate an advanced plan, it is necessary to
struggle with conservative thought. Some people clearly realize there is
immense production potential but they set the plan targets very low. All
they care about is to be able to fulfill the plan comfortably. The
formulation process of a plan is also a process of struggle between
advanced and conservative thought.

Plan targets should be advanced. But this does not mean that the higher
the targets, the more morale will be heightened. Plan targets that are
too high to be practicable not only do not mobilize mass activism, but
will discourage mass activism. Advanced plan targets must have a
scientific basis; they must be reliable and practicable. Chairman Mao
said: "Nobody should indulge in illusions, plan his action beyond what
the objective conditions allow, and dare to do impossible things."
<a id="11">[[11]](#bot_11)</a> Plan targets
that are objectively possible should not be set too high. Leave some
leeway. Practical experience demonstrates that plan targets which are
not set too high and which enable the plan to be overfulfilled through
the efforts of the masses are more favorable to mobilizing mass
activism.

It is necessary to combine long-range plans (plans covering
five years, ten years, twenty years) with short-term plans
(annual plans, quarterly plans, and monthly plans) in national economic
planning. If long-range plans are not set up, it is difficult to arrange
capital construction. Long-term plans embody long-term targets. They
encourage people to stand high, to see afar and to exert themselves. The
worker comrades put it well: "Without big targets in our minds, even one
simple straw is heavy enough to bend our backs. With big targets in our
minds, even the T'ai-shan will not bend our backs." But long-term plans
require that short-term plans materialize, are grasped, and serve the
purpose of comparison and inspection so that the realization of
long-term plans will not fall short.

The planning work for an economy under a socialist collective ownership
system has its own characteristics. An economy under a collective
ownership system must obey the leadership of a unified state plan. But
it can retain a higher degree of flexibility provided that the unified
state plan and state policies and laws are not violated. This permits a
fuller mobilization of the activism and initiative of the collective
economy in socialist production through local adaptations so that the
collective economy can develop with the development of the state
economy.

### Major Study References

Engels, _Anti-Diihring_, Part 3, Chapter 2.

Stalin, _Socialist Economic Problems of the Soviet Union_.

Chairman Mao, "On the Correct Handling of Contradictions among the
People," Section 1.

### Review Problems

1\. Why do we say that only socialist society can adopt a planned
economy? What is the superiority of a socialist planned economy?

2\. What are the important proportional relations in the national
economy? How should these proportional relations be correctly handled?

3\. What does planning is primary and pricing is secondary
tell us? How should the law of planned development and the law of value
be correctly used to promote the development of socialist production?

Notes
-------------------

<a id="bot_s_a">[\*](#s_a)</a> She-hui-chu-i ching-chi shih chi-hua
ching-chi --- kuo-min ching-chi ti yu chi-hua an pi-li fa-chan.

<a id="bot_1">[[1]](#1)</a> "A Criticism That Is Not a Criticism,"
_Complete Works of Lenin_, Vol. 3, p. 566.

<a id="bot_2">[[2]](#2)</a> Engels, _Anti-Duhring_, _Selected Works of Marx
and Engels_, Vol. 3, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 323.

<a id="bot_3">[[3]](#3)</a> Chairman Mao, "Comments on 'A Long-Term Plan
for the Red Star Collective Farm,'" _Socialist Upsurge in China's
Countryside_, Vol. 1, p. 311.

<a id="bot_4">[[4]](#4)</a> "On the Correct Handling of Contradictions
among the People," [Selected Readings from the Works of Mao
Tse-tung], (Type A), Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1965, p. 338.

<a id="bot_5">[[5]](#5)</a> Engels, _Anti-Duhring, Selected Works of Marx
and Engels_, Vol. 3, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 336.

<a id="bot_6">[[6]](#6)</a> Stalin, _Socialist Economic Problems of the
Soviet Union_, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1961, p. 14.

<a id="bot_7">[[7]](#7)</a> Ibid., p. 15.

<a id="bot_8">[[8]](#8)</a> Short-range products refer to the means of
production that are in temporary short supply. The so-called
"short-range balance" refers to a negative balance that accommodates
these short-range products.

<a id="bot_9">[[9]](#bot_9)</a> Quoted from _Jen-min jih-pao_
_People's Daily_, December 4, 1949.

<a id="bot_10">[[10]](#10)</a> Quoted from _Jen-min jih-pao_
_People's Daily_, February 21, 1969.

<a id="bot_11">[[11]](#11)</a> Chairman Mao, "Preface to _Socialist
Upsurge in China's Countryside," Socialist Upsurge in China's
Countryside_, Vol. 1, p. 4.
