[*9* The Unchanging Nature of Imperialism](content.xhtml#bck_Ch09) 
===============================================================================

[Imperialism Is Monopoly
Capitalism](content.xhtml#bck_Ch09)[\*](Ch09.xhtml#fn9_1)

Before the 1870s, capitalism was in a stage of free competition. From
the 1870s onward, free competition steadily developed into monopoly. At
the end of the nineteenth century and in the beginning of the twentieth
century, capitalism completed its transition from free competition to
monopoly and developed into imperialism. Lenin gave a complete and
precise definition to imperialism: 'Imperialism is a special stage of
capitalism. This special nature is manifested in three ways: (1)
imperialism is monopoly capitalism; (2) imperialism is parasitic and
decaying capitalism; and (3) imperialism is moribund capitalism."
<a id="1">[[1]](#bot_1)</a> This chapter first
deals with the basic attributes of imperialism as monopoly capitalism.

Lenin pointed out that there are five basic characteristics in the
economic aspect of imperialism. They are: "(1) production and capital
concentration have been developed to such an extent that economic life
is dominated by the monopoly organization; (2) banking capital and
manufacturing capital have merged, and a financial oligarchy has emerged
on the basis of this 'financial capital'; (3) capital export, as
distinct from commodity export, assumes special significance; (4) an
international monopoly alliance has been formed; and (5)
the most powerful capitalist powers have dismembered the territories of
the world." <a id="2">[[2]](#bot_2)</a> Lenin's
theory concerning imperialism is our telescope and microscope for
understanding the reactionary nature of imperialism.

<a id="Monopoly Is the Deep-rooted Economic Basis of Imperialism">[[Monopoly Is the Deep-rooted Economic Basis of Imperialism]](#bot_Monopoly Is the Deep-rooted Economic Basis of Imperialism)</a>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _Monopoly Is an Inevitable Development of Capitalism_

The transition from free competition to monopoly is the most marked
economic phenomenon in the development of capitalism into imperialism.
Other characteristics of imperialism are all related to monopoly and
developed on the basis of monopoly. Therefore, imperialism is often
known as monopoly capitalism. The birth of monopoly capitalism passed
through three basic stages.

In the first stage in the 1860s and 1870s, free competition in
capitalism reached its zenith of development. In manufacturing, the
electric motor, the internal combustion engine, and a new steel-refining
method were invented. The development of productive forces shifted the
relative share of light and heavy industry in favor of heavy industry.
With the development of heavy industry characterized by a higher organic
composition of capital, concentration of capital was accelerated.
Monopoly organizations began to emerge.

In the second stage after the explosion in 1873 of the most severe
economic crisis in the nineteenth century, competition among enterprises
became more acute. Many medium and small enterprises closed down, making
way for the extensive development of monopoly organizations. In the
United States, in 1879 Rockefeller set up the first trust (the Standard
Oil Company). In 1880, the total production of anthracite coal was
monopolized by seven companies. However, monopoly was still
not in a dominant position. Most monopoly agreements were
short-term and unstable. In the last thirty years of the nineteenth
century, the steam turbine, the automobile, and the diesel locomotive
were invented one after another. Productive forces were highly
developed. The relative share of heavy industry was further increased.
Conditions for a transition to the monopoly stage were basically
completed.

In the third stage at the end of the nineteenth century and the
beginning of the twentieth century, the accumulation and concentration
of capital greatly accelerated. More and more capital was concentrated
in the hands of big enterprises. Monopoly organizations rapidly
developed to gain control over various major manufacturing sectors and
formed the basis of all economic life. In the beginning of the twentieth
century, United States monopoly organizations controlled 70 percent of
the metallurgical industry, 66 percent of the iron and steel industry,
81 percent of the chemical industry, 85 percent of the aluminum
production, 80 percent of the tobacco and sugar refining industries, and
95 percent of coal and oil production. From this time on, free
competition capitalism grew into monopoly capitalism, and capitalism was
transformed into imperialism. Hence, Lenin said, "Monopoly is the
deep-rooted basis of imperialism."
<a id="3">[[3]](#bot_3)</a>

The transition from free competition capitalism to imperialism has not
changed the fundamental nature of capitalism. Its economic basis is
still capitalist private ownership of the means of production. Its class
contradiction is still the contradiction between the proletariat and the
bourgeoisie. Longstanding economic laws such as competition and chaotic
production are still playing their active roles. Chairman Mao pointed
out: 'When the free competition stage in capitalism has developed into
imperialism, the fundamental contradictions between the proletariat and
the bourgeoisie, as well as the nature of the capitalist society, have
not changed." <a id="4">[[4]](#bot_4)</a> In the
imperialist stage, some new features emerged, intensifying and
magnifying the existing contradictions of capitalism.

### _Monopoly Organization Guarantees the Extraction of High Monopoly Profits_

Monopoly organization is either the largest capitalist enterprise or an
alliance of capitalist enterprises. They control the production and
distribution of certain products and set monopoly prices by virtue of
their monopoly position in order to extract high monopoly profits. The
economic pulses of capitalist countries are under their manipulation.

Monopoly organizations assume many forms: some are "short-term price
agreements" in which various enterprises collude to fix prices; some are
"cartels" in which the enterprises are independent in production but
have agreements concerning how to share the market, set up quotas, and
fix prices; some are "syndicates" in which the enterprises are
independent in production but cooperate in purchasing inputs and selling
final products; others are "trusts" in which the enterprises producing
identical goods merge; and some are "consortia" which consist of
enterprises of different trades (manufacturing and mining, trading
companies, transport and shipping companies, as well as banks). The
development of monopoly organizations of various kinds gradually
controls all economic sectors and the economic pulses of capitalist
countries. Especially since the end of the Second World War, social
production and social wealth have been increasingly concentrated in the
hands of a few monopoly capitalists. This is manifested by:

1\) A continuous expansion in the size of enterprises and increasing
monopolization. Take the United States as an example. There was only one
company with capital assets exceeding one billion dollars in 1901. In
1960, this had increased to 96 companies. In 1970, it had again
increased to 282 companies.

2\) Increasing control of industrial fields by a few monopoly
capitalists. In many industrial fields, a few big companies control a
major share of the production or even the whole production. In the
United States, in 1969 the big automobile companies monopolized 78.1
percent of the nation's total automobile production. In England, in 1970
one iron and steel company monopolized 93 percent of the
steel output. In Japan, in 1970 seven big monopoly organizations
controlled 95.5 percent of the total shipbuilding tonnages of the
country. In France, in 1968 one electric power company controlled the
electric power generation for the whole country.

3\) Increasing concentration and monopolization of agricultural
production. In 1939, there were 6.097 million farms in the United
States. In 1959, this was reduced to 3.701 million. In 1971, only 2.800
million were left. An average of 90,000 farms went bankrupt each year.
In fact, in the United States fewer than 50,000 big monopoly farms, or 2
percent of all the farms, produce and market more than 80 percent of the
total United States agricultural produce.

4\) Increasing diversification of the monopoly organization. In the past,
many companies produced only one or two products. But by the end of the
1960s, their operations extended to many areas. For example, the United
States International Telephone and Telegraph Company was established in
1920. During the first forty years, its primary business was to
manufacture telecommunications equipment. But during the last decade, it
has purchased 50 companies unrelated to telecommunications equipment.
Its operations have extended to bread, artificial fibers,' construction,
hotels, and insurance. It controls 150 companies all over the world, and
its distribution networks have spread over more than 100 countries and
regions.

Though there are differences among various forms of monopoly
organization and further changes may develop, their nature is identical.
They all seek to guarantee high monopoly profit to the monopoly
capitalist by monopolizing production and markets.

High monopoly profit is profit well in excess of average profit which is
obtained by the monopoly capitalist through his monopoly position. Where
does high monopoly profit come from? It still comes from the surplus
value created by the worker in the monopoly enterprise. The monopoly
organization adopts various blood and sweat labor systems to increase
labor intensity and exploit the worker. In addition, the monopoly
capitalist also transfers part of the income of the worker
and other people into his own hands by raising prices of consumer goods.
Taking advantage of his monopoly position, the capitalist depresses the
purchasing price of agricultural produce and raises the selling price of
manufactured products to extract part of the value created by the
peasant. Through monopoly pricing, he grabs part of the profit of the
capitalists outside the monopoly organization. By nonequivalent
exchanges, the monopoly capitalist plunders the people of colonies,
satellites, and other countries. This shows that what the monopoly
organization gains in the form of high monopoly profit is exactly what
the worker, the small producer, and the people of colonies and
satellites lose. A small part is extracted from nonmonopoly medium and
small capitalists. From the viewpoint of the capitalist world as a
whole, therefore, monopoly pricing has not changed the sum of the value
nor the surplus value created in the capitalist world. In other words,
monopoly pricing has operated within the sphere of the law of value; it
has merely changed the form in which the law manifests itself.
Similarly, the law of surplus value, the fundamental economic law of
capitalism, is still functioning in the monopoly stage; only its effects
and forms have changed. Prior to the monopoly stage, it was manifested
through the average profit; in the monopoly stage, it is manifested
through high profit.

The rising of monopoly profits implies that the working class and the
laboring people are subject to increasingly heavier exploitation and
that the exploitative measures of the monopoly capitalists have become
more ruthless than ever before. From 1940 to 1949, the United States
monopoly companies obtained an average of 24.356 billion dollars of high
monopoly profit every year. From 1960 to 1969, this increased to 67.47
billion dollars. In Japan, the rate of surplus value in manufacturing
amounted to 182 percent in 1930; it increased to 313 percent in 1954 and
345 percent in 1960. From these two sets of figures, we can see the
acute polarization between the rich and the poor in the capitalist
country.

### _Monopoly Leads to More Intense Competition_

Free competition leads to monopoly. But monopoly cannot eliminate
competition. On the contrary, it intensifies competition because
competition is a product of capitalist private ownership. Monopoly has
not changed the nature of capitalist private ownership and therefore
cannot eliminate competition. This is especially true because means of
production are increasingly concentrated in the hands of a few
oligopolists. In order to eliminate their opponents, the monopoly
organizations resort to any conceivable means to discourage their
competitors. Competition becomes more acute and cruel. In the
imperialist stage, life and death struggles among capitalists and
capitalist cliques are manifested in the following ways:

Competition between monopoly organizations and nonmonopoly
organizations. Under capitalist conditions, no matter how concentrated
production is, it is impossible to achieve absolute monopoly. A certain
number of nonmonopoly organizations always exists. Even in countries
where monopoly capitalism is most developed, a large number of medium
and small enterprises still exists. For example, in the United States,
of her 4 million manufacturing enterprises, medium and small enterprises
account for more than 3 million. Life and death struggles between
monopoly and nonmonopoly enterprises are inevitable.

Intense competition also exists among monopoly organizations in their
fight for sources of raw materials, markets, and transportation
facilities.

There also exists among various enterprises in the same monopoly
organization competition for markets and higher production and sales
quotas. This kind of competition may even lead to the disintegration of
some monopoly organizations and results in new monopoly organizations
and new competition.

In trusts and consortia, the struggle among various big capitalists for
leadership, stock control, and share of profits never ceases.

Therefore, monopoly capitalism is not "organized capitalism"
as the bourgeoisie and the revisionists claim. On the
contrary, monopoly intensifies competition and aggravates the capitalist
contradiction between social production and private ownership and
between the organized production of individual enterprises and the
chaotic conditions of social production. Lenin pointed out long ago,
"Monopoly arising from free competition cannot eliminate competition. It
is superimposed on competition and coexists with competition,
consequently leading to many very acute contradictions, frictions, and
confrontations." <a id="5">[[5]](#bot_5)</a> "The
combination of the two contradicting 'principles' of competition and
monopoly represents the true nature of capitalism. It is exactly this
combination that leads to disintegration, namely socialist revolution."
<a id="6">[[6]](#bot_6)</a>

<a id="Financial Capital Is an Omnipotent Monopolist">[[Financial Capital Is an Omnipotent Monopolist]](#bot_Financial Capital Is an Omnipotent Monopolist)</a>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _Financial Capital Is Formed by a Merger of Banking Capital and Manufacturing Capital_

The first economic attribute of imperialism is monopoly. The second is
the formation of financial capital and the rule of financial oligopoly.
With the emergence of monopoly in manufacturing, monopoly also appears
in the banking industry. When free competition is dominant, the bank
serves as a middleman. It pools idle funds in society for the use of
manufacturing and commercial capitalists through short-term loans. With
the arrival of the imperialist stage, the bank is transformed from a
middleman into an all-powerful monopolist. Monopoly in the banking
industry leads to a fundamental change in the relation between the bank
and the manufacturing industry. Big banks in-filtrate the manufacturing
industry by purchasing manufacturing stocks. Manufacturing monopoly
organizations infiltrate the banks by purchasing banking stocks. As a
result, monopoly banking capital and monopoly manufacturing capital
gradually merge to form financial capital. "The concentration of
capital; the development of monopoly from concentration; the merger
between the banks and the manufacturing industry or their
mixed growth --- these are the origins of financial capital
and the content of this concept."
<a id="7">[[7]](#bot_7)</a> "The characteristic of
imperialism is not manufacturing capital, but financial capital."
<a id="8">[[8]](#bot_8)</a> The few largest
capitalists who control a large amount of financial capital are the
financial oligopolists. The chief means by which financial capital
controls the national economy is the "participation system." Through a
major joint-stock company ("mother company") which the financial
capitalist controls, stocks of other joint-stock companies are
purchased. Once their stocks are under control, they become "son
companies." These "son companies" use the same method to control more
"grandson companies." In this way, a relatively small amount of capital
can control and manipulate capital many times the amount of the original
capital. The national economy and most of the wealth created by the
laboring people are thus under the control of a few financial
oligopolists. In 1968, eighteen financial groups in the United States
controlled capital assets worth 678.4 billion dollars. Of these, the
Morgan and Rockefeller groups were the two biggest monopoly financial
organizations. They had the most economic power and their influence
covered the whole capitalist world. As of 1970, these two financial
groups controlled capital assets totaling 330.4 billion dollars,
representing about half of the capital assets controlled by the eighteen
United States financial monopoly organizations and exceeding all the
capital assets controlled by the financial monopoly organizations of
England, France, Japan, and West Germany combined. Enterprises
controlled by the Morgan group covered various departments of the
national economy, especially basic industries such as iron and steel,
electricity and gas, electronics, and chemicals. In public utilities and
transportation, the Morgan group's position was even stronger, play-ing
a vital role in the United States economy. Enterprises controlled by the
Rockefeller group were more concentrated. Its five major oil companies
controlled 94.1 percent of the oil extraction in the United States in
1967. The two groups exercise a decisive influence in the United States
economy.

### _Financial Capital Directly Controls State Political Power and Other Superstructures_

Lenin pointed out, "Once monopoly is formed, controlling vast amounts of
capital, it inevitably infiltrates into various aspects of society's
life." <a id="9">[[9]](#bot_9)</a> To further
exploit and oppress the laboring people for high monopoly profit,
financial capital seeks control not only of the economic lifeblood of
the state but also of state political power. Financial oligopolists
bribe high-level officials and state legislators to serve as their
spokesmen for the control of the state machinery. Sometimes they
personally occupy the leadership positions of the state. Take the
postwar Eisenhower administration as an example. Eisenhower came into
power with the support of the Rockefeller and Morgan groups. Of the 272
high-level officials in his administration, 150 were big capitalists.
Among them, Secretary of State Dulles was a trustee of the Rockefeller
Foundation, Defense Secretary Wilson was a general manager of the
General Motors Company, Gates, another defense secretary, was an
important person in the Morgan group and served as the director of the
Morgan Guaranty Trust Company in 1965, and Secretary of the Treasury
Humphrey was a responsible official of the Han-na Mining Company which
was a major enterprise of the Cleveland group. The financial oligopoly
controlled not only state political power but also various spheres of
the superstructure. The newspaper, publishing, broadcasting, television,
and movie industries were all tinder the control of monopoly capital and
financial oligopoly. The Rockefeller group also owned the largest
"philanthropic enterprises," various foundations, learned societies,
museums, hospitals, "welfare organizations," and "cultural" centers.
These were all tools used by the Rockefeller financial group to expand
into various aspects of social life.

### _State Monopoly Capitalism Pushes the Relation between Capital and Labor to the Ultimate_

Engels once prophesied that when capitalism develops to a
certain stage, "the real agent of the capitalist society,
the state, must take the responsibility for managing production."
<a id="10">[[10]](#bot_10)</a> In the imperialist
stage when the productive forces have been greatly developed, some
monopoly capital groups are shown to be increasingly incapable of
controlling the productive forces. Consequently, the phenomenon arises
in which "the state merges ever closer with the alliance of capitalists
which possesses enormous power. Its scandalous oppression of the
laboring people becomes more severe."
<a id="11">[[11]](#bot_11)</a> This is state
monopoly capitalism. State monopoly capitalism is monopoly capitalism
based on capitalist ownership and the merger of monopoly capital with
state political power.

The rapid development of state monopoly capitalism is a prominent
feature of contemporary imperialism. Since the Second World War,
imperialist countries have implemented socalled "nationalization" by
having the state purchase private enterprises; or the state has invested
directly in so-called "state enterprises." These state monopoly
capitalist enterprises constitute a very high proportion of capitalist
enterprises. In 1968, the share of state monopoly capitalist enterprises
in four major countries in Western Europe was as follows:

Countries

Percentage share in staff and workers

Percentage share in assets

------------------------------------------------------------------------

France

11.2

33.5

West Germany

8.7

22.7

Italy

11.6

28

United Kingdom

8.5

17

The development of United States state monopoly capitalism had its own
characteristics. During the Second World War, the United States
government established a large number of "state enterprises." After the
war, they were sold to the monopoly capital groups at very
low prices. At the same time, the United States government adopted the
"blood transfusion" technique of supporting the monopoly capital groups
by means of taxes extracted from the people.

The services rendered by the imperialist countries to the monopoly
bourgeoisie, in addition to "nationalization" and "state enterprises,"
assumed the following forms, assuring the monopoly groups high monopoly
profits: (1) Using federal treasury funds and the people's taxes to
subsidize the capitalists when they undertook the risks of investment;
(2) redistributing a large part of the national income in favor of the
monopoly capital organization through state legislation and budgets; (3)
creating facilities conducive to the monopoly capitalist's concentration
and accumulation of capital and to his absorption of medium and small
enterprises; and (4) though the means by which the imperialist countries
serve their monopoly bourgeoisie are different, their objective is
always the same, namely, the strengthening of the capitalist enslavement
of the proletariat. "The more of the productive forces which the
bourgeois state takes into its possession, the more it becomes a truly
total capitalist, and thè more it exploits the people. The worker is
still a hired laborer and a proletarian. The capitalist relation has not
only not been eliminated, it has been elevated to its ultimate."
<a id="12">[[12]](#bot_12)</a>

Contrary to the claims of the bourgeois apologists and the modern
revisionists, state monopoly capitalism does not have any "socialist
element" which can exercise planned leadership over the national
economy. On the contrary, state monopoly capitalism has not changed the
capitalist nature of production relations a bit. It is merely a tool of
the imperialist countries to serve the monopoly organization and
strengthen the rule of the financial oligopoly. State monopoly
capitalism strengthens the exploitation of the working class and the
laboring people by monopoly capital, strengthens the plunder of the
people of the colonies by monopoly capital, accelerates armament and war
preparations, and intensifies competition and chaos so that the inherent
contradiction in the capitalist society becomes more acute.
It runs into increasing opposition from the proletariat and the broad
laboring people and, at the same time, goes a step further in preparing
the material conditions for the proletarian revolution.

<a id="Capital Export Leads to World Domination by Financial Capital">[[Capital Export Leads to World Domination by Financial Capital]](#bot_Capital Export Leads to World Domination by Financial Capital)</a>
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _Capital Export Is an Indication of Relative Capital Surplus_

"The characteristic of the old capitalism in which free competition was
dominant is commodity export. The characteristic of the newest
capitalism in which monopoly is dominant is capital export."
<a id="13">[[13]](#bot_13)</a> Capital export
exists in the premonopoly stage of capitalism; but it is widespread and
significant only in the stage of monopoly capitalism. This is because
the cruel exploitation of the domestic laboring people by the monopoly
organization in the imperialist countries helps accumulate a large
amount of capital. However, since almost all profitable business has
already been monopolized inside the country and high monopoly profit
cannot be guaranteed in other, less developed, domestic sectors, a large
amount of accumulated capital thus becomes "surplus capital." Where can
profitable outlets be found for this "surplus capital"? In those
developing countries where capital is scarce, wages are low, land and
raw materials are cheap, and high profit can be obtained. Therefore,
capital is exported for high monopoly profits through direct investment
(mining, manufacturing, railroads, shops) and indirect investment
(loans), greedily exploiting the broad laboring people of the developing
countries. Capital export has developed rapidly only since the beginning
of the twentieth century. In 1970, the total capital export from major
capitalist countries reached more than 300 billion dollars, an increase
of more than five times over that of 1914.

### _Capital Export Is an Imperialist Tool to Exploit and Oppress the People of Various Countries_

In the search for monopoly profits and external expansion, capital
export is an important tool used by the monopoly capitalist to exploit
and plunder the people of various countries, especially the peoples of
the developing Asian, African, and Latin American countries. Take old
China as an example. On the eve of the Anti-Japanese War, foreign
capital in China totaled 4.3 billion dollars. Near the end of the war,
it increased to 9.8 billion dollars, of which, the share of investment
by Japanese imperialism was the highest, amounting to 6 billion dollars.
This foreign capital controlled 70 percent of China's modern industry
and transportation, 95 percent of the iron and steel and petroleum
industries, 75 percent of the electric power and coal industry. More
than half of the food processing industry was operated by foreign
capital. In 1945, after imperialist Japan surrendered, United States
imperialism replaced Japanese imperialism as the dominant power in
China. In 1948, the American imperialist investment in China (including
so-called "United States aid") represented 80 percent of foreign
investment in China. The invasion of foreign capitalism "not only played
a role in undermining China's feudal economic basis, but also created
certain objective conditions and possibilities for the development of
capitalist production in China."
<a id="14">[[14]](#bot_14)</a> However, "the
purpose of the imperialist powers in invading China was definitely not
to transform feudal China into a capitalist China. Their purpose was
just the opposite. They wanted to transform China into their semicolony
or colony." <a id="15">[[15]](#bot_15)</a> The
influx of a large amount of foreign capital on a long-term basis
seriously undermined the social productive forces of China and brought
extreme poverty to the livelihood of the Chinese people, reducing China
to a semicolonial and semifeudal status.

After the Second World War, there was a large increase of capital export
from the capitalist countries, and the United States became the largest
capital-exporting country. In 1914, the United States exported only 3.5
billion dollars of capital. In 1970, it rapidly rose to
155.5 billion dollars, an increase of more than forty-three times in
fifty-six years. With the rapid increase in capital export, there were
also large increases in the high monopoly profits of the monopoly
capitalists. From 1950 to 1970, the profit from United States private
direct investment in foreign countries amounted to 88.77 billion
dollars, or 14 percent higher than the total United States private
direct investment in foreign countries up to the end of 1970. Profit
from investments made by imperialism in Asia, Africa, and Latin America
was astonishingly high. For example, in 1970 United States direct
investment in Asia, Africa, and Latin America accounted for 27.3 percent
of her total foreign direct investment. In the same year, profit
extracted from Asia, Africa, and Latin America accounted for 43.5
percent of the total profit from all foreign direct investment. At the
present time, imperialism has become the greediest bloodsucker of the
people over a large area of the world.

After the Second World War, in addition to further developing private
capital export, the imperialist countries paid increasing attention to
state capital export. The major form of this state capital export was
foreign "aid." From mid-1945 to mid-1971, the total amount of United
States foreign aid reached 149.6 billion dollars. This foreign "aid" was
classified into so-called "grants" and 'loans." "Grants" were nominally
free; but in fact, they were the strings by which the grantee countries
were controlled. Chairman Mao long ago exposed the reactionary political
objective of United States imperialist "aid": "Gifts, yes; but with
conditions. What conditions? You have to follow my footsteps."
<a id="16">[[16]](#bot_16)</a> In recent years,
the proportion of loans from the imperialist countries is increasing,
and the proportion of "grants" is correspondingly decreasing. These
so-called loans all have interest rates exceeding 5 percent per annum.
The highest rate reached 8 percent per annum. In addition, many
political, economic, and military strings are attached. It is not only a
bloodsucking straw but is also an important tool for the implementation
of the aggressive and expansionary policies of imperialism and the fight
for world hegemony.

Capital export from the imperialist countries inflicts
severe hardships on the colonial and semicolonial countries and their
people. However, the imperialists and revisionists try their best to
defend these aggressive acts. They claim that capital export can "help"
the economically underdeveloped countries to reach economic prosperity.
The Soviet revisionist renegades even unabashedly suggested that
imperialism could spend all the money saved through total disarmament to
"help" the economically underdeveloped countries in Asia, Africa, and
Latin America create a new era. All nations and people of the world who
have been subject to exploitation and slavery have had their full share
of the hardship brought about by the so-called "aid" of imperialism. The
market is shrinking for such arguments of the Soviet revisionist
renegades.

<a id="The International Monopoly Alliance Carved up the World Economically">[[The International Monopoly Alliance Carved up the World Economically]](#bot_The International Monopoly Alliance Carved up the World Economically)</a>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _The International Monopoly Alliance Is a Supermonopoly_

The monopoly organizations of a country first carve up the domestic
market. Under capitalism, the domestic market is closely related to the
foreign market. With increasing capital export and the expansion of the
international association and the sphere of influence of the largest
monopoly alliance, a few large monopoly organizations of several
countries can control most of the world's production and distribution of
some commodities. These large monopoly organizations are comparable in
power and may, out of self-interest and under certain conditions, make
temporary international agreements and form alliances to set
international monopoly prices, divide up sources of raw materials and
distribution markets, limit production quotas, and thus form an
international monopoly organization. These monopoly organizations have
already exceeded the boundary of one country. Lenin called them
"supermonopolies."

These supermonopoly organizations appeared as early as the
1870s and developed rapidly in the twentieth century. After
the Second World War, new international monopoly organizations were
formed, and some old international monopoly organizations disintegrated.
According to statistics, up to 1968 the total foreign capital assets
(accounting value) of international monopoly companies amounted to 94
billion dollars. The annual production value of their foreign subsidiary
companies was 240 billion dollars. The five largest international
monopoly organizations were: the General Motors Company, the New Jersey
Standard Oil Company, the Ford Motor Company, the British-Dutch Shell
Oil Company, and the General Electric Company. As a result of the rapid
development of international monopoly companies, the monopoly financial
groups' monopoly of world production and trade is strengthened. Some
manufacturing fields in the capitalist world such as rubber tires, oil,
tobacco, pharmaceuticals, and automobiles are almost completely
controlled by international monopoly organizations. In recent years,
there have been new developments in regional international monopoly
alliances. The Common Market and the European Free Trade Area of Western
Europe are, economically speaking, regional international monopoly
alliances of sorts. Their development and expansion provide checks and
balances to the vain attempts of the United States and the Soviet Union
to divide up the world.

### _The Struggle among International Monopoly Alliances Is Intensifying_

In the imperialist stage, the enormous development of monopoly
organizations requires more supplies of resources and markets for
commodities and more areas for capital investment. Take 1969 for
instance: the proportion of raw materials which the United States
imported from Asia, Africa, and Latin America was as follows: tin ore,
close to 100 percent; manganese ore, 91.9 percent; copper ore, 78.2
percent; petroleum, 62.9 percent; chromium and others, 41.6 percent. The
proportion of raw material imports by Japan, West Germany, and the
United Kingdom from Asia, Africa, and Latin America was also high. The
struggle for sources of raw material supply among
international monopoly organizations, therefore, has become increasingly
severe. To fight for oil in the Middle East, the monopoly capitalists of
many countries tried very hard to get into this area, and consequently,
the struggle was especially acute and complex.

The struggle among the monopoly organizations of various countries for
markets to sell commodities is also very acute. After the Second World
War, the United States dominated the capitalist world market for some
time. Her total volume of exports accounted for one-third of the total
capitalist world exports. But with the rising economic power of Western
Europe and Japan, the United States hegemony began to decline. In 1971,
her share of the capitalist world exports was reduced to only 14.2
percent. In Asia, Africa, and Latin America, the monopoly organizations
of Western Europe, North America, and Australasia repeatedly engaged in
intense struggle for markets. Faced with the influx of Japanese
automobiles on the West Coast of the United States, Henry Ford II, the
president of the Ford Motor Company, lamented: "This is only the
beginning. These Japanese will soon invade the heart of America." Lenin
pointed out profoundly: "The dismembering of the world among the
capitalists is not due to their specific vicious character. Rather, it
occurs because concentration has reached such a stage that they cannot
but take this path to obtain profit."
<a id="17">[[17]](#bot_17)</a>

The international monopoly alliance is originally an international
monopoly organization set up by the monopoly capitalists of various
countries to divide up the world market for high monopoly profits. But
agreements and alliances among the monopoly capitalists of various
countries to divide up the world are at best temporary and relative.
Their pursuit of high monopoly profits guarantees that the struggle
among them will go on forever. Imperialism and revisionism hold that the
internationalization of capital will bring the possibility of peace to
nations. This wishful thinking has been sharply criticized by Lenin.
Lenin pointed out: "The form of struggle among international monopoly
organizations may change frequently for various comparatively local and
temporary reasons. But the nature of the struggle and the
class content of the struggle will never change as long as classes
exist." <a id="18">[[18]](#bot_18)</a> The history
of the last half-century or so has fully confirmed Lenin's scientific
judgment.

<a id="Competition among the Imperialist Powers for the Division and Redivision of the World">[[Competition among the Imperialist Powers for the Division and Redivision of the World]](#bot_Competition among the Imperialist Powers for the Division and Redivision of the World)</a>
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _Colonies Are Important Conditions for the Existence of Imperialism_

In the imperialist era, the economic division of the world by monopoly
capital must inevitably be followed by the territorial division of the
world into colonies. The implementation of the colonial policy and the
seizure of colonies began in the stage of primitive accumulation. But
only in the imperialist stage is the "climax" of struggle for colonies
begun, and the struggle to divide the world's territories among
imperialist countries intensified. This is because:

First, colonies are the most important source of raw materials for
imperialism. Monopoly leads to large-scale production. The larger the
scale of production, the more raw materials are needed, and the more
important it is to control the sources of raw materials. Lenin pointed
out, "The more advanced capitalism is, the scarcer raw materials are,
and the more acute the struggle for the world's sources of raw materials
becomes, the more intense the struggle to colonize
is."<a id="19">[[19]](#bot_19)</a>

Second, colonies are the most profitable outlets for the capital exports
of imperialism. In colonies, the monopoly organizations of the suzerain
can exploit and enslave the laboring people more ruthlessly. They can
more easily eliminate competitors through monopolistic means and
guarantee high monopoly profits for the exported capital.

Third, colonies are the most profitable sales market for the monopoly
organizations. The suzerain can use protective ta riffs to guarantee
their monopolist position.

Fourth, colonies are also military strategic bases in the struggle for
world hegemony among imperialist countries. The suzerain
can establish a large number of military bases there, plunder large
quantities of strategic materials, and recruit large numbers of soldiers
to serve the military policies of imperialism.

In sum, colonies are important conditions for the existence of
imperialism. "Only by occupying colonies can the triumph of the monopoly
organization be fully secured."
<a id="20">[[20]](#bot_20)</a> Therefore, the
imperialist countries are always fighting for more colonies. After the
1870s, the struggle to divide the world's territories among the
imperialist powers reached an extremely acute degree. Up to 1914, the
colonies occupied by England, Russia, France, Germany, the United
States, and Japan reached 65 million square kilometers, and they ruled
523 million people. Among them, the area of the colonies owned by the
czar of Russia was second only to that of England. At that time, out of
Russia's 22.8 million square kilometers, 17.4 million square kilometers
were colonies. Lenin pointed out clearly, 'The czarist government
expressed more vividly than other national governments the reactionary
nature of war, plundering, and enslaving peoples."
<a id="21">[[21]](#bot_21)</a> Czarist Russia was
the "prison of various nationals."
<a id="22">[[22]](#bot_22)</a>

China had long been fiercely carved up by the imperialist powers. From
the latter part of the nineteenth century, the imperialist countries who
invaded China marked out their respective spheres of influence according
to their economic and military power in China and reduced her to a
semicolony. For example, the provinces in the middle and lower reaches
of the Yangtze River were under British influence; Yunnan, Kwangtung,
and Kwangsi provinces were under French influence. After the
Russo-Japanese War in 1905, the southern part of northeast China was
brought under Japanese influence. In the process of imperialism's
slaughter of China, czarist Russia was the first "to stretch out her
grisly hands." <a id="23">[[23]](#bot_23)</a> The
old czar invaded China 'like a thief"
<a id="24">[[24]](#bot_24)</a> and occupied more
than 1.5 million square kilometers of Chinese territory, equal to three
times the area of France or twelve times that of Czechoslovakia.

### _The Division and Redivision of Colonies Inevitably Leads to Wars_

To obtain high monopoly profits, imperialism must engage in aggression
and expansion and fight for the division and redivision of world
territories. The outcome of such competition is determined by the
relative strength of the imperialist countries. The mightiest holds
world hegemony. The highest form of resolving conflicts through strength
is war. As long as imperialism exists, wars are inevitable. Imperialism
fights for colonies and world hegemony and obtains high monopoly profits
through wars. Lenin pointed out, "Modern wars are created by
imperialism." <a id="25">[[25]](#bot_25)</a> The
two world wars in the first half of the twentieth century were caused by
the division and redivision of the world and the struggle for world
hegemony among the imperialist powers.

Economic monopoly inevitably intensified the fundamental contradictions
of imperialism and accentuated the political and economic crises of
capitalism. To free themselves from political and economic crises, to
reduce domestic class contradictions, and to save the capitalist system,
the imperialist powers ran the risk of wars, engaging in moribund
struggles. Chairman Mao pointed out, "The outbreak of imperialist world
wars was an attempt by the imperialist countries to extricate themselves
from new economic and political crises."
<a id="26">[[26]](#bot_26)</a>

Once we understand the economic reality of imperialism, we will
understand Lenin's famous statement that "on the economic basis of
private ownership of means of production, imperialist wars are
inevitable."
<a id="27">[[27]](#bot_27)</a> United
States imperialism prospered through wars. In the two world wars, the
United States monopoly organization engaged in large-scale rearmament
transactions and obtained windfall gains from wars. In the First World
War, United States monopoly capitalists obtained 38 billion dollars as
windfall profit; in the Second World War, they obtained 117 billion
dollars as windfall profit and became the dominant power in the
capitalist world. From then on, the United States monopoly bourgeoisie
looked all the more to wars as shortcuts to prosperity and continuously
waged aggressive wars. According to statistics, in the aggressive war in
Korea, United States monopoly capital obtained 115.4 billion dollars as
a windfall profit; in the aggressive war in Vietnam, in 1964 and 1965
alone, the windfall profit amounted to 76 billion dollars. Every dollar
in the pocket of the United States millionaires is stained with the
blood of the laboring people. As long as imperialism exists, the source
of modern wars exists. To eliminate wars, we must eliminate the
imperialist system.

However, the imperialist and revisionist always fabricate all sorts of
nonsense to deceive the people in order to protect the imperialist
system. A typical absurdity is found in [On
Super-imperialism], a work which the chief of the Second
International, Kautsky, fabricated on the eve of the First World War.
Purposedly overlooking the fact that the external expansion and
aggression of imperialism are determined by the substance of monopoly
capitalism, he vigorously contended that those were the imperialists'
conscious policies. Hence, he alleged: "These policies of
neosuperimperialism would replace international financial struggles with
international cooperation to exploit the world." As a result, a
permanent peace would emerge. Pointedly exposing this fallacy, Lenin
asserted: "Kautsky's [On Super-imperialism] is aimed at
creating an illusion that permanent peace could be achieved under
capitalism. It is an extremely reactionary idea attempting to dupe the
masses; it is a means to detract people's attention from contemporary
acute contradictions and outstanding problems to an illusory future of
the so-called 'neosuperimperialism.'"
<a id="28">[[28]](#bot_28)</a> Since
the fabrication of Kautsky's [On Superimperialism], all
revisionists have treated it as a most valuable treasure. They
repeatedly propagated this "theory" under different guises and
conditions. Modern Soviet Russian revisionists headed by Brezhnev
described certain relative, temporary agreements between the two
contemporary superpowers as so-called "structures for permanent peace,"
vainly attempting to conceal the deep-seated contradictions between them
and to deceive the people and tranquilize the opposite side in order to
facilitate their own imperialist expansion. Within imperialism, there is
both competition and collusion. Collusion is for the purpose of larger
competition. Competition is absolute and longterm, and collusion is
relative and temporary. Temporary agreements today set the stage for
larger competition tomorrow.

Monopoly is the most deep-seated economic basis of imperialism. It
determines the aggressive and plundering nature of imperialism and will
not change. Just as Chairman Mao pointed out: 'When we say that
'imperialism is very dangerous,' we mean that its nature cannot change.
Imperialist elements will never put down their weapons or transform
themselves into Buddhas until their extinction."
<a id="29">[[29]](#bot_29)</a>

### _Major Study References_

Lenin, [Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism],
chaps. 1-6.

Chairman Mao, "On New Democracy."

Chairman Mao, "Cast Away Illusions and Prepare for Struggle."

### _Review Problems_

1\. What are the basic characteristics of imperialism? Why do we say
monopoly is the most deep-seated economic basis of imperialism?

2\. Why do we say the nature of imperialism will never change? Criticize
[On Superimperialism] and its disguised versions.

[Notes]
-------------------

[\*](#bck_fn9_1) Ti-kuo-chu-i ti pen-hsing shih pu hui kai-pien
ti --- ti-kuo-chu-i shih lung-tuan ti tzu-pen-chu-i.

[1](#bck_fn9_2) 'Imperialism and the Split in the Socialist
Movement," [Selected Works of Lenin], Vol. 2, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 883.

[2](#bck_fn9_3) Ibid., p. 808.

[3](#bck_fn9_4) Ibid., p. 817.

[4](#bck_fn9_5) "On Contradiction," [Selected
Works of Mao Tse-tung], Vol. 1, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968,
p. 289.

[5](#bck_fn9_6) [Imperialism, the Highest Stage of
Capitalism], [Selected Works of Lenin], Vol. 2,
Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, pp. 807-08.

[6](#bck_fn9_7) "Materials for the Amendment of the Party
Charter," [Complete Works of Lenin], Vol. 24, pp. 431-32.

[7](#bck_fn9_8) [Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism,
Selected Works of Lenin], Vol. 2, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she,
1972, p. 769.

[8](#bck_fn9_9) Ibid., p. 810.

[9](#bck_fn9_10) Ibid., p. 779.

[10](#bck_fn9_11) Engels, [Anti-DÜhring],
[Selected Works of Marx and Engels], Vol. 3, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 317.

[11](#bck_fn9_12) [State and Revolution],
[Selected Works of Lenin], Vol. 3, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she,
1972, p. 171.

[12](#bck_fn9_13) Engels, [Anti-Duhring],
[Selected Works of Marx and Engels], Vol. 3, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 318.

[13](#bck_fn9_14) [Imperialism, the Highest Stage of
Capitalism], [Selected Works of Lenin], Vol. 2,
Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 782.

[14](#bck_fn9_15) "The Chinese Revolution and the Chinese
Communist Party," [Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung], Vol. 2,
Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 589.

[15](#bck_fn9_16) Ibid., p. 591.

[16](#bck_fn9_17) "Farewell, Leighton Stuart! "[Selected Works
of Mao Tse-tung], Vol. 4, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p.
1384.

[17](#bck_fn9_18) [Imperialism, the Highest Stage of
Capitalism], [Selected Works of Lenin], Vol. 2,
Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 795.

[18](#bck_fn9_19) Ibid., p. 795.

[19](#bck_fn9_20) Ibid., pp. 802-03.

[20](#bck_fn9_21) Ibid., p. 802.

[21](#bck_fn9_22) "Socialism and War," [Complete Works of
Lenin], Vol. 21, pp. 313-14.

[22](#bck_fn9_23) "The Revolutionary Proletariat and National
Self-Determination," [Complete Works of Lenin], Vol. 21, p.
392.

[23](#bck_fn9_24) "Chinese Wars," [Complete Works
of Lenin], Vol. 4, p. 335.

[24](#bck_fn9_25) Ibid., p. 336.

[25](#bck_fn9_26) "Draft Decisions of the Left
Zimmerwaldists," [Complete Works of Lenin], Vol. 21, p. 324.

[26](#bck_fn9_27) "The Current Situation and the Party's
Tasks," [Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung], Vol. 2, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 578.

[27](#bck_fn9_28) "Preface to the French and German Editions
of [Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism],"
[Selected Works of Lenin], Vol. 2, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she,
1972, p. 733.

[28](#bck_fn9_29) [Imperialism, the Highest Stage of
Capitalism], [Selected Works of Lenin], Vol. 2,
Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 836.

[29](#bck_fn9_30) "Cast Away Illusions and Prepare for
Struggle," [Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung], Vol. 4, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1968, pp. 1375-76.
