[*10* Imperialism Is the Eve of Proletarian Socialist Revolution](content.xhtml#bck_Ch010) 
=======================================================================================================

[Imperialism Is Decaying and Moribund
Capitalism](content.xhtml#bck_Ch010)[\*](Ch010.xhtml#fn10_1)

After capitalism develops from free competition to the monopoly stage,
its various contradictions intensify. These contradictions, like
volcanos, threaten the existence of imperialism. The life of imperialism
is then limited. Despite its fierce facade, imperialism is a paper
tiger. Imperialism is the eve of socialist revolution.

<a id="Imperialism Is Parasitic or Decaying Capitalism">[[Imperialism Is Parasitic or Decaying Capitalism]](#bot_Imperialism Is Parasitic or Decaying Capitalism)</a>
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _The Stagnating Tendency of the Development of Production and Technology_

When capitalism develops into imperialism, it begins to decay and
decline. Imperialism is parasitic or decaying capitalism. The decaying
nature of imperialism is brought about by monopoly rule. Monopoly is the
economic basis of the decaying nature of imperialism.

The decaying nature of imperialism is primarily manifested in the
serious obstruction of the development of productive forces
by the monopoly organization. It artificially prevents technical
progress and ushers a stagnating tendency into the development of
production and technology. Before monopoly, the capitalist cannot
neglect technological advancement in his pursuit of excess profits at
the expense of his competitors. In the monopoly stage, because the
monopoly capitalist controls an absolute majority of some production
sectors, he can obtain high monopoly profits by setting monopoly prices.
Thus, the motive to adopt advanced technology is weakened to a certain
degree. Under monopoly rule, the capitalist is afraid that advanced
technology may weaken his monopoly position. He often artificially
obstructs the development of new technology.

Why is the monopoly capitalist so afraid of advanced technology and why
does he obstruct it? First, the widespread adoption of new technology
and new equipment almost certainly reduces the cost of products and
increases output. But it will also result in capital loss or the
obsolescence of his original machines and equipment and bring about
invisible depreciation; second, the adoption of new technology and
equipment will lead to competition from similar and cheaper commodities
which may threaten his monopoly position. The monopoly capitalist often
reduces production to maintain monopoly prices and extract high monopoly
profits. Therefore, many new techniques and inventions beneficial to the
development of production are put aside once their patents have been
bought by the monopoly capitalist. For example, the technology of
artificial petroleum is detrimental to the monopoly of the petroleum
companies and has been put aside for exactly twenty years. The invention
of atomic energy is a great scientific achievement, but it is used by
imperialism to make atomic weapons for aggression and not fully used as
motive power for industry.

The obstruction of the development of production and technology by
monopoly results in a gradual decline in the rate of capitalist expanded
reproduction. Take the United States as an example. Its industrial
production increased by about 3.9 times during the thirty years from
1871 to 1900. But in the thirty years \[sic\] from 1901 to 1929, it
increased by only 2.7 times. In the thirty years from 1930
to 1959, the average (annual) rate of increase in industrial production
was only 4.4 percent. The decreasing rate of development in United
States production fully exposes the decaying nature of imperialism.

The appearance of a stagnating and decaying tendency in the development
of production and technology in the imperialist stage does not mean that
the development of production technology in the imperialist countries
has come to a standstill. Lenin pointed out: "Should we think that this
decaying tendency precludes any rapid development of capitalism, we
would be mistaken. No, in the imperialist phase, individual industrial
fields, individual bourgeois classes or strata, and individual countries
will manifest in different degrees first this tendency and then that
tendency." <a id="1">[[1]](#bot_1)</a> This is
because free competition leads to monopoly. But monopoly by no means
eliminates competition. It only makes competition more acute or
ruthless. In competition, various monopoly capital groups adopt
violence, bribery, deception, and fraud to eliminate competitors. At the
same time, the relative economic strength among various major capitalist
countries may change. Under the general tendency of frustrated
development of productive forces, the position of some capitalist
countries may deteriorate, but the position of others may improve.
Therefore, in the monopoly stage, the development of production and
technology in the imperialist countries suffers a general stagnating
tendency. But this by no means precludes the possibility of more rapid
development in the production technology of a particular period,
individual, or sector.

In the imperialist phase, the production technology of individual
countries may undergo more rapid development. But, it is often temporary
and exceptional. Take Japan as an example. In the 1950-1971 period,
Japan's national product increased by an average annual rate of more
than 10 percent. This trend cannot long be maintained. This faster
development of Japan's production was a result of substantial help from
United States imperialism to the monopoly capital of Japan. The
aggressive wars against Korea and Vietnam by United States imperialism
brought windfall profits to the monopoly capitalists of
Japan. During the aggressive war against Korea in the 1950-53 period,
United States imperialism paid Japan at least 2 billion dollars for
military "special needs" orders. During the aggressive war against
Vietnam, United States imperialism's payment to Japan for "special
needs" amounted to 300-400 million dollars per year in the first half of
the 1960s. From 1965 onward, it increased to 500-600 million dollars per
year. United States imperialism also gave large quantities of loans to
the monopoly capital of Japan, invested directly in Japan's heavy
industry, and exported a large number of technical patents to Japan. At
the same time, Japanese monopoly capital cruelly exploited the domestic
laboring people and received large amounts of subsidies from the state
budget. All these also contributed to the fast development of Japan's
industry. The undervalued Japanese yen made Japanese goods very
competitive in the world market. The above shows that the factors that
promoted the development of Japan's industry cannot last long. The fast
development of the Japanese economy is not only temporary but also
abnormal and without foundations. First, along with the blind
development of Japanese industry, agricultural production steadily
declined. After the Second World War, the production of wheat cereals in
Japan plummeted, the production of beans decreased substantially, and
rice production has declined since 1968. From 1960 to 1970, the
self-sufficiency rate of Japan's food products fell from 90 percent to
73 percent. Second, raw materials are largely imported and commodities
depend heavily on the export market. The import ratio of ten major items
of raw materials, including copper, aluminum, iron ore, petroleum, and
coal, was 71 percent in 1960 and increased to 90 percent in 1970. The
export ratio of Japanese industrial products increased from 18.3 percent
in 1950 to 30.1 percent in 1969, including 46.4 percent of synthetic
fiber woven goods, 67.4 percent of sewing machines, and 68.9 percent of
ships. These facts show that the foundation of Japan's economic
development is very shaky. It is impossible to sustain development at
present rates on a long-term basis. The tendency toward stagnation will
inevitably dominate.

### _The Militarization of the National Economy Seriously Undermines the Social Productive Force_

The militarization of the national economy runs into a blind alley that
imperialist economic development must ultimately follow. It is an
inevitable result of the development of the inherent contradictions of
capitalism and is also a concrete manifestation of the increasingly
decaying nature of imperialism. To reduce the contradiction between the
growth of capitalist productive forces and inadequate effective demand
for the laboring masses and to avoid economic crises and redivide the
world to obtain high monopoly profits, imperialism madly expands
rearmament to prepare for wars. An increasing amount of the national
income is used to support a large army, make weapons, support
war-related research, and engage in imperialist aggressive wars.

The militarization of the national economy in the imperialist countries
is first expressed in the increase of military expenditures. After the
Second World War, the share of military defense expenditures in the
United States budget steadily increased. From 1946 to 1970, direct
United States military expenditures totaled 1,100 billion dollars,
averaging 45 billion dollars a year. In the 1972-73 fiscal year, direct
military expenditures totaled 78.3 billion dollars. With 11.7 billion
dollars as subsidies for veterans and 3.2 billion dollars for the space
program, the three items added up to 93.2 billion dollars. It was also
manifested in the increasing shares of industrial production and
scientific research in armament industries and military scientific
research. A large amount of the labor force was transferred from the
production sphere of social wealth to armament industries and military
scientific research fields. In 1967-68, the level of employment in
United States armament production in several sectors and its ratio to
the total labor force were: 126,900 in electronic equipment, or 33.8
percent; 256,900 in radio equipment, television sets, and
telecommunications tools, or 38.6 percent; and 615,900 in aircraft and
accessories, or 72.4 percent. Of the total United States scientific and
technical manpower, two-thirds is related to armament and
space research. In the United States labor force of 77 million
(excluding armed forces), about 20 percent depends on armament orders
from the Defense Department.

The general militarization of the national economy in the imperialist
countries led to serious unfavorable consequences. In recent years, the
United States has spent about 100 billion dollars on armament and
aggression. The products are either used to murder people in the
battlefield and destroy social wealth or, if stored away, soon become
scrap. They may become "obsolete" before even leaving the plant when new
weapons are invented. The militarization of the national economy has
brought about strange results: the inflationary expansion of the arm
ament industry and the deflationary contraction of civilian industries.
In the past twenty years, the production of guided missiles, aircrafts,
and space vehicles in the aeronautics and space industries in the United
States has increased its value by six times. On the other hand, the
development of civilian industries has been slow. Some industries have
had to reduce production. Take the textile industry as an example. The
output in 1970 was only 88 percent that of 1950. The policy of
aggression and wars pursued by imperialism and the militarization of the
national economy lead to an immense waste of manpower, goods, and wealth
and to great destruction of social wealth. This is a notable feature of
the decaying nature of imperialism.

### _The Bourgeoisie Increasingly Becomes a Stratum That Thrives Solely on Interest_

The parasitic and decaying nature of imperialism is further manifested
by the bourgeoisie's increasingly becoming a stratum that thrives solely
on interest. This so-called stratum that thrives on interest refers to
those who have lost all connection with the production process and 'live
on interest." The bourgeoisie has never been engaged in production labor
and has led an extravagant life by exploiting the worker. In the stage
of imperialism, the parasitic nature of the bourgeoisie develops
further. Capitalist enterprises are wholly managed by
specialized managerial personnel. The bourgeoisie, especially the
monopoly bourgeoisie, is completely divorced from the production process
and lives a parasitic life solely on income from stocks and shares.
Lenin pointed out long ago, 'Imperialism is simply a great concentration
of money capital in a few countries," "and thus the stratum of people
who live on interest and do not work increases rapidly."
<a id="2">[[2]](#bot_2)</a> For example, the
income from dividends and individual interest in the United States in
1950 totaled 19.5 billion dollars. In 1963, it reached 50.3 billion
dollars, an increase of 157 percent. The national income increased by
only 102 percent in the same period. In 1970, the income from dividends
and individual interest in the United States reached 89.7 billion
dollars. The United States monopoly bosses lead extravagant lives with
the income from exploitation. Some bosses of financial groups not only
build villas, golf courses, and hunting grounds, using a lot of land for
their own pleasure, but also show off their riches to each other. In
1964, one big United States monopoly capitalist named Ford spent half a
million dollars for a party to celebrate his daughter's birthday. Not
too long afterward, another big monopoly capitalist named Mellon spent a
million dollars on a party to introduce his daughter to "society" to
impress Ford. This incident fully exposed the parasitic nature of the
monopoly bourgeoisie.

Another feature of imperialism is a rapid increase in capital export.
With the increase in capital export, a few rich countries can become
interest-earning countries that specialize in exploiting the people of
colonies and satellite countries, being parasites on many economically
underdeveloped countries. According to statistics, from 1950 to 1970 the
interest from direct private United States investment reached 88.77
billion dollars, 14 percent higher than the total amount of direct
private foreign investment up to the end of 1970. Direct United States
investment in Latin America was 3 billion dollars in 1946 and increased
to 11.7 billion dollars in 1969. But in these twenty-four years,
interest derived from direct investment in Latin American countries
which was paid to the United States alone amounted to 23.49
billion dollars, much higher than the net amount of direct United States
investment.

United States interest derived from overseas is largely remitted
annually to the United States to be spent by a handful of monopoly
bourgeoisie. In the 1960-1970 period, remitted interest reached 43.4
billion dollars. During this period, unremitted interest amounting to 19
billion dollars was used for reinvestment to increase foreign
exploitation. Thus, with United States imperialism's annual increase in
foreign investment and interest, its parasitic nature also increased
yearly.

All this shows that capital export is a solid foundation for imperialism
's oppression and exploitation of the majority of nations and countries
and a solid foundation for the parasitic capitalism of a few rich
countries.

### _The Appearance of Worker-Elites Is Another Manifestation of the Parasitic Nature of Capitalism_

The parasitic nature of imperialism is inevitably reflected in the labor
movement. The formation of worker-elites and the appearance of
revisionism are reflections of the parasitic nature of imperialism in
the labor movement. Lenin pointed out: "Interest-earning countries are
parasitic and decaying capitalist countries. This condition cannot but
have effects on all social and political conditions of these countries,
especially on two basic factions in the labor movement."
<a id="3">[[3]](#bot_3)</a> The monopoly
bourgeoisie plunders and exploits the proletariat of colonies, satellite
countries, and their own countries to obtain large amounts of high
monopoly profits. To suppress opposition from the toiling masses, they
use a small part of the huge monopoly profits to bribe a number of scabs
to become agents of the monopoly bourgeoisie. These are worker-elites
who get high salaries and live like the bourgeoisie, serving the
monopoly bourgeois class. They mingle with the workers and specialize in
selling out the interests of the working class and subverting worker
movements. These worker-elites are loyal running dogs of the monopoly
bourgeoisie of the imperialist countries.

High profits from monopoly capital is the economic basis of
revisionism in the labor movement. Under imperialist conditions and with
the appearance of the worker-elites, a revisionist theory and line to
protect imperialist rule emerges. The worker-elites are bourgeois
elements disguised as workers. Revisionism is a bourgeois class theory
under the guise of Marxism. The worker-elites and revisionists are the
most treacherous hidden enemies in the labor movement, and they may be
regarded as boils on the body. If these boils are not completely
removed, imperialism will maintain its decaying condition for a longer
period of time. But, just as Lenin pointed out, "The rapid and vicious
development of opportunism does not assure its victory."
<a id="4">[[4]](#bot_4)</a> Lenin further
pointed out, 'If the struggle against imperialism is not closely
associated with the struggle against opportunism, then it is just so
many empty words." <a id="5">[[5]](#bot_5)</a>

### _Toward Total Political Reaction and the Steady Increase in the Severity of Social Crises_

In the stage of capitalist free competition, the bourgeoisie still uses
"democracy," "freedom," "equality," and "universal love" as guises to
conceal the truth of bourgeois dictatorship. In the stage of
imperialism, these thin "veils" are steadily trimmed down. Whoever
opposes oppression and exploitation will be cruelly suppressed. Lenin
pointed out: "The political superstructure of this new economic order,
namely, monopoly capitalism (imperialism is monopoly capitalism), is
transformed from democracy to political reaction. Free competition
requires democracy, but monopoly requires political reaction."
<a id="6">[[6]](#bot_6)</a> In the
United States, not only people who oppose violence were suppressed, but
people who championed nonviolence have also been slaughtered. In 1968, a
black American minister named Martin Luther King was murdered by the
United States imperialists because he opposed racial discrimination and
fought for civil rights. In line with total political reaction,
imperialism has also degenerated in its ideology and culture. In
imperialist countries, publications and movies devoted to violence and
sex have flooded the market. In California, there have been thirty
companies specializing in making sex movies. In the capitalist world,
strange clothing, modern dances, and "Beatles" music bands have been
common, and exhibitions of "impressionist" art painted by monkeys have
been much in vogue. International contests of women "crying" and
crawling races for babies under a year old are reported to have taken
place. The culture and art under imperialism have been rotten to the
core. Criminal activities such as theft and robbery and gangsterism and
drug abuse have reached crisis proportions.

Facing this rotten society, many youths perceive a spiritual void,
feeling that life is empty and meaningless and without a future. Some
United States historians think that the United States "faces a situation
in which the people have lost faith in their ideals, system, and future"
and "are plagued by numerous crises." Some are even more blunt: "Our
crises, which are spiritual in nature, can be traced to the obvious
failure of our selfinflating capitalist social system"
[Newsweek], July 6, 1970). Amidst the profound
contradictions of imperialism, a few progressive elements gradually wake
up to accept Marxism and reestablish the Marxist party and organization,
unite the masses, and engage in resolute struggle against the
imperialist system.

The parasitic and decaying nature of imperialism which results from the
basic characteristic of imperialism, namely, monopoly, reveals that
imperialism is merely a paper tiger. It looks fierce, but in fact it
does not have much strength. The masses are the ones with real power,
not imperialism or reactionaries. Just as Chairman Mao pointed out,
"From a strategic viewpoint, or a long-run viewpoint, or looking at
their substance, we must in effect treat imperialism and all
reactionaries as paper tigers."
<a id="7">[[7]](#bot_7)</a>

<a id="Imperialism Is Dying Capitalism">[[Imperialism Is Dying Capitalism]](#bot_Imperialism Is Dying Capitalism)</a>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _The Intensification of the Contradiction between the Proletariat and the Bourgeoisie within the Imperialist Countries_

Stalin said: "Lenin called imperialism 'dying capitalism.'
Why? Because imperialism carries the contradictions of
capitalism to their end. What follows is the beginning of revolution."
<a id="8">[[8]](#bot_8)</a> When capitalism
develops into the monopoly stage, the basic contradictions between the
proletariat and the bourgeoisie and the capitalist nature of society
have not changed. However, in the imperialist stage, monopoly has not
only pushed social production to a larger scale but has also brought
about even more concentration of the private ownership of the means of
production. The development of the basic contradictions of capitalism
intensifies all external and internal contradictions of imperialism.
Chairman Mao pointed out, "The intensification of the contradiction
between the two classes (the proletariat and the bourgeoisie), the
development of contradictions between monopoly and competitive capital,
the intensification of contradictions between the suzerain and the
colonies, and the acute manifestation of contradictions among
imperialist countries due to their uneven development lead to a special
stage of capitalism, namely, imperialism."
<a id="9">[[9]](#bot_9)</a> Because of the
serious intensification of all external and internal contradictions in
imperialist countries, imperialism becomes dying capitalism, and the eve
of proletarian socialist revolution draws near.

To pursue high monopoly profits, the monopoly bourgeoisie doubles its
efforts to exploit and plunder the workers and push millions of laboring
masses to the brink of starvation. The monopoly bourgeoisie devises
various intensive labor systems, raises labor intensity, worsens labor
conditions, and indiscriminately and incessantly increases its
exploitation of the workers. The bourgeoisie also consciously relies on
inflation to reduce real wages and lower purchasing power. For example,
in the 1963-1970 period, prices and the cost of living increased yearly
in major capitalist countries because of inflation. In this period, the
United States' cost of living increased 26.8 percent. In Britain, it
increased 35.3 percent; in France, 30.9 percent; in West Germany, 20.6
percent; and in Japan, 44.4 percent. Wages, however, did not increase
sufficiently to offset inflation and the increasing cost of living. The
livelihood of the laboring people worsened further. Through the
government, monopoly capital plundered the laboring masses
even more with excessive taxation. In the 1940-1970period, tax revenue
in the United States increased by sixteen times, from 16.5 billion
dollars in 1940 (20 percent of the national income) to 278 billion
dollars in 1970 (35 percent of the national income). Heavy taxation
weighed down the laboring people, choking them breathless.

To protect its economic interests, monopoly capital inevitably resorts
to fascist dictatorship to intensify the suppression of the workers
through the state machinery. Overall political reaction is a natural
political reflection of a monopoly capitalist economy. To implement
fascist dictatorship and to suppress the people, imperialism expands the
reactionary government machinery to a horrifying extent. Take the United
States for example, where one out of every twenty people is an employee
of the reactionary state machinery.

The ruthless economic exploitation and bloodthirsty political
suppression of the proletariat by the monopoly bourgeoisie intensify the
contradiction between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. The heavier
the oppression, the stronger the resistance. The daily awakening of
millions of members of the proletariat and the laboring masses
continuously wages revolutionary struggle against the capitalist system.

Since the Second World War, especially in recent years, strong and
massive worker movements have come into existence. The struggle against
imperialism is intensifying. According to obviously deflated official
United States figures, in 1970 United States workers were on strike
5,600 times and 3.3 million workers participated. In 1971, both a
nationwide strike involving 500,000 telephone workers and a strike
involving 160,000 railway workers occurred. In the strikes, the workers
chanted the combat slogan of "oppose (aggressive) wars, oppose poverty,
oppose oppression," and they increasingly combined economic struggle
with political struggle. According to official data from Britain (also
obviously deflated), in 1970 there were 3,888 strikes with 1.65 million
workers participating. In 1971, 13.5 million workdays were lost in
connection with strikes in Britain. The revolutionary struggles of the
Japanese working class have also gathered strength.
According to official Japanese statistics, the number of so-called
"labor-capital disputes" (actually struggles of the worker against the
capitalist) increased from 1,345 in 1955 to 5,283 in 1969, an increase
of 2.9 times. In the same period, the number participating increased
from 3.748 million to 14.483 million, an increase of about three times.

The mushrooming development of worker movements is a revolt by a vital
organ of imperialism. It promotes the further deterioration of
capitalist economic and political crises and incessantly deals serious
blows to the rule of monopoly capital. The fate of imperialism is
increasingly precarious.

### _The Contradiction between Imperialism and the Oppressed Nations Widens_

"Colonies were seized with gunpowder and swords."
<a id="10">[[10]](#bot_10)</a>
After it has seized colonies and semicolonies with force, imperialism
ruthlessly exploits and enslaves these areas and nations. To exercise
political control, it buttresses puppets, stations armed forces, and
establishes military bases. To facilitate economic exploitation, it
forcibly opens trading ports, controls customs and external trade,
monopolizes money and finance, and forcibly seizes the rights to mine,
operate factories, and navigate on inland waterways. To obtain high
monopoly profits, the imperialist country ruthlessly exploits and
oppresses the people of the colonies and semicolonies. The
contradictions between imperialism and the oppressed nations are
aggravated to an unprecedented degree. Imperialism controls the economic
pulse of the colonies and semicolonies and colludes with local feudal
power and comprador capital to restrict the development of their
national economies. Imperialism also resorts to various measures to
force the national economies of the colonies and semicolonies to be
"simplified," that is, to produce only a few commodities required by
foreign monopoly organizations, and thus cause their economic
development to be lopsided and abnormal. As a result, the economies of
these areas cannot be independent or self-sufficient, but can only rely
on imperialism.

Since the Second World War, new upsurges have been appearing
continuously in the national liberation movements of Asia, Africa, and
Latin America. Many countries and areas have freed themselves from the
fetters of imperialism and colonialism and have started on their
independent roads. However, imperialism will never automatically retreat
from the large areas of Asia, Africa, and Latin America. In addition to
their usual colonial measures, they have increasingly resorted to
neocolonial measures and have vainly attempted, under the guise of
economic "aid," to further their vicious scheme of control-lingthese
newly emerging independent countries. Through "aid," the capitalists
have sought to dump their surplus goods and have used "aid" as a means
of selling commodities. Through "aid," they have sought to control the
economic policy of the recipient countries and control the development
of these national economies. When some countries have refused to buy
this imperialist trick, the imperialists have resorted to aggression and
subversion and have gathered reactionary forces to instigate coups
d'etat and overthrow progressive governments that have opposed
imperialism and insisted on national independence.

The cruel plunder and bloodstained enslavement have widened and
intensified the contradictions between the imperialists and the
oppressed nations and peoples. From the day when the imperialist bandits
set their feet on the sacred land of Asia, Africa, and Latin America,
the oppressed nations and people who dearly treasure their freedom and
independence have taken up stones, bows and arrows, spears, and
artilleries to deal blows to imperialism. The heavier the exploitation
and the tighter the oppression by imperialism, the more intense has
become the resistance struggle of the oppressed nations and peoples.
After the October Revolution, the national liberation movement ushered
in a new historical era, constituting part of the proletarian socialist
world revolution. The national liberation movements and the proletarian
revolutionary movements in the imperialist countries are interrelated
and mutually supporting. The colonies and semicolonies, once the reserve
army of imperialism, have now become the reserve army of
the proletarian world revolution. Just as Chairman Mao pointed out, "The
revolutionary storm which has swept over Asia, Africa, and Latin America
will surely deal a decisive and demolishing blow to the whole old
world." <a id="11">[[11]](#bot_11)</a>

### _The Intensification of Contradictions among Imperialist Countries_

Imperialism's struggle to divide the world economically and
territorially has intensified the contradictions among the imperialist
countries. Their struggles for hegemony and territory and their mutual
fighting and massacring will really help the oppressed and exploited
nations rise up to revolt.

The increasingly uneven economic and political development among
capitalist countries in the imperialist stage further intensifies the
contradictions among the imperialist countries.

Lenin pointed out, "Uneven economic and political development is the
absolute law of capitalism."
<a id="12">[[12]](#bot_12)</a> In the
capitalist world, some countries develop faster, and others slower. Some
countries even advance by leaps and bounds in certain periods of time.
The uneven economic development among the capitalist countries
inevitably leads to uneven political development. In other words, uneven
economic development must inevitably lead to changes in the relative
strength of the imperialist countries.

The law of uneven economic and political development has played a role
in the whole history of capitalism. However, in the imperialist period,
this uneven development of capitalism intensifies. In the second half of
the nineteenth century, England, an old capitalist country, seized a
great number of colonies and assumed a monopoly position in the world.
Her relatively easy and complacent position of manipulating high profits
from her territories all over the world lulled her into stagnation in
technology and production. Meanwhile, armed with new technology, the
capitalist countries which arose later, especially the United States and
Germany, accelerated their development. In the 1880s, the United States
had already caught up with England and had taken the lead
in world industrial production, and by the early twentieth century,
Germany had also surpassed England, assuming second place in world
industrial production. The shift in the relative positions of economic
strength had brought about a relative shift in political power.
Following the shift of the balance of power, the countries began to
struggle to redivide their spheres of influence and colonies.

Since the Second World War, the law of uneven economic and political
development among imperialist countries has continued to play a role.
Its characteristics have been: the decline of the United States, the
continued decline of England, the rapid ascension of West Germany and
Japan, and the substantial gains of Italy and France. In the twenty
years from 1949 to 1969, the annual average growth rates in the national
product of these countries were: the United. States --- 3.9 percent in
the first ten years and 4.3 percent in the second ten years; England ---
2.5 percent in the first ten years and 3 percent in the second ten
years; West Germany --- 7.4 percent in the first ten years and 5.2
percent in the second ten years; France --- 4.5 percent in the first ten
years and 5.9 percent in the second ten years; Italy --- 6.1 percent in
the first ten years and 5.6 percent in the second ten years; Japan ---
more than 10 percent for the whole period. New and uneven conditions
appeared in their relative strength in terms of industrial production,
capital and commodity exports, and international financial positions.
The intensification of uneven economic and political development among
the imperialist countries inevitably intensified the struggles among
them for markets and supply bases for raw materials and for outlets for
capital exports.

The operation of the law of uneven economic and political development
inevitably led to wars and slaughter among the imperialist countries,
thus revealing their weak links. These then became favorable conditions
for the proletariat and the revolutionary peoples to bury imperialism.
In his study of the laws of imperialist development, Lenin arrived at an
important conclusion: Because of their uneven economic and political
development, the imperialist battlefront will be smashed at its
weakest link, and socialist revolution will first triumph
in one or several countries. Lenin not only created a revolutionary
theory for our achievement of victory, he also set a brilliant example
of how to carry out revolution. In the First World War, Russia was the
focal point of all contradictions in imperialism at that time and was
also the weakest link in the imperialist chain. Lenin seized this link
and led the Russian proletariat to launch the great socialist October
Revolution, overthrow the Russian bourgeois dictatorship with
revolutionary violence, establish the world's first socialist country
under proletarian dictatorship, and usher in a new era in human history.
After the Second World War, the great victory of the national
revolutions in China and other countries of Asia and Europe further
confirmed the accuracy of Lenin's scientific theory.

The outbreak of the two world wars, the victorious march of the
proletarian socialist revolutions, and the upsurge of national
liberation movements further aggravated imperialism's political,
economic, and social crises.

Although immense changes have occurred in the world, the imperialist
period is not yet over. Chairman Mao often teaches us: We are still in
the period of imperialism and proletarian revolution. Lenin's scientific
analysis of imperialism based on the fundamental principles of Marxism
is entirely correct. The basic principle of Leninism is not outdated;
today it still remains the theoretical basis of our thought.

The life of imperialism will not be long. It is parasitic and dying
capitalism on the eve of proletarian socialist revolution. But, it will
never retreat from the historical stage of its own free will. The nature
of imperialism determines that the closer it draws to the end of its
life, the more desperately it will struggle for survival. We must
realize that imperialism is basically weak, a paper tiger. We must
cultivate a bold spirit, daring to struggle and being good at struggle.
And we must unite the revolutionary peoples of the world to carry the
struggle against imperialism to the end. "Make trouble, fail, make
trouble again, fail again until doom --- this is the logic used by
imperialism and all reactionary groups of the world to deal with the
people 's uprisings. They will never deviate from this
logic <a id="13">[[13]](#bot_13)</a> Making
trouble is an expression of the desperate struggle of imperialism; to be
doomed to failure until its elimination is the inevitable destiny of
imperialist development. No one can change this law of history.

### _Major Study References_

Lenin, [Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism],
chaps. 7-10.

Lenin, "Imperialism and the Split in the Socialist Movement."

Chairman Mao, "Talk with American Correspondent Anna Louise Strong."

### _Review Problems_

1\. Why do we say that imperialism and all reactionaries are paper
tigers?

2\. Why do we say that imperialism is the eve of proletarian socialist
revolution?

[Notes]
-------------------

[\*](#bck_fn10_1) Ti-kuo-chu-i shih wu-ch'an ch'ieh-chi
she-hui-chu-i koming ti ch'ien-yeh --- ti-kuo-chu-i shih fu-hsiu ho
ch'ui-ssu ti tzu-pen-chu-i.

[1](#bck_fn10_2) [Imperialism, the Highest Stage of
Capitalism], [Selected Works of Lenin], Vol. 2,
Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 842.

[2](#bck_fn10_3) Ibid., p. 818.

[3](#bck_fn10_4) Ibid., p. 820.

[4](#bck_fn10_5) Ibid., p. 843.

[5](#bck_fn10_6) Ibid.

[6](#bck_fn10_7) "On the Ridicule of Marxism and 'Imperialist
Economism,' "[Complete Works of Lenin], Vol. 23, p. 34.

[7](#bck_fn10_8) Notes on "Talk with American Correspondent
Anna Louise Strong," [Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung], Vol.
4, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 1088.

[8](#bck_fn10_9) "On the Basis of Leninism," [Complete Works
of Stalin], Vol. 6, p. 65.

[9](#bck_fn10_10) "On Contradiction," [Selected
Works of Mao Tse-tung], Vol. 1, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968,
p. 289.

[10](#bck_fn10_11) "Socialism and War," [Selected Works of
Lenin], Vol. 2, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 672.

[11](#bck_fn10_12) Chairman Mao, "A Congratulatory Telegram
to the Fifth Congress of the Labor Party of Albania," quoted in [Jen-min
jih-pao] \[People's Daily\], November 4, 1966.

[12](#bck_fn10_13) "On the Slogan of European Alliance,"
Complete Works of Lenin, Vol. 21, p. 321.

[13](#bck_fn10_14) "Cast Away Illusions and Prepare for
Struggle," [Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung], Vol. 4, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 1375.
