[*21* How Are Personal Consumer Goods Distributed in Socialist Society?](content.xhtml#bck_Ch021) 
==============================================================================================================

[The Socialist Principle of "From Each according to His Ability, to Each
according to His
Labor"](content.xhtml#bck_Ch021)[\*](Ch021.xhtml#fn21_1)

The distribution of personal consumer goods is an important aspect of
production relations. Like the distribution of national income, the
distribution of personal consumer goods is basically determined by how
the means of production are owned. Once this is decided, it interacts
with the consolidation and development of the ownership system.

<a id=""From Each according to His Ability, to Each according to His Labor" Is a Profound Revolution in the Distribution System">[["From Each according to His Ability, to Each according to His Labor" Is a Profound Revolution in the Distribution System]](#bot_"From Each according to His Ability, to Each according to His Labor" Is a Profound Revolution in the Distribution System)</a>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _Distribution Is Determined by the Ownership of the Means of Production_

The distribution relations of consumer goods in any society are not
subject to people's willful choice. The ownership relations determine
the distribution relations. Who controls the means of production is a
matter of decisive importance. Marx pointed out: "Any distribution of
the means of production is merely a result of the
distribution of production conditions themselves. And the distribution
of production conditions reflects the production modes themselves."
<a id="1">[[1]](#bot_1)</a> In capitalist
society, because the means of production are controlled by the
capitalist, the destitute worker can only sell his labor power and
subject himself to exploitation and oppression by the capitalist. In
socialist society, because the means of production are controlled by the
proletariat and the whole laboring people, a socialist public ownership
system is established. The distribution power is controlled by the
proletariat and the laboring people and the principle of distribution
favors the laboring people.

Therefore, distribution cannot be divorced from the ownership system. To
talk about distribution without any reference to the ownership system is
"distribution determinism." More than a hundred years ago, La Salle, a
scab hidden in the German workers' movement, argued that poverty among
the laboring people could be eliminated if there was an "equitable
distribution." The Liu Shao-ch'i-Lin Piao clique of renegades and
traitors also nonsensically said that "the contradictions between the
production relations and the productive forces in socialist society are
mainly manifested in the issue of distribution" and that once the
distribution issue is resolved, "the people will be rich and the country
will be strong." All these are merely copies of "distribution
determinism." Before the proletariat seized political power, to advocate
"distribution determinism" was to praise the capitalist mode of
production. According to them, the only minor fault was uneven
distribution. Therefore, the capitalist system did not need to be
overthrown; all that was needed was to improve "distribution." However,
since the means of production were controlled by the bourgeoisie, how
could the distribution relations be fundamentally altered? "Distribution
determinism" is a poison that paralyzes the fighting spirit of the
revolutionary people. After the proletariat seized political power, to
advocate "distribution determinism" was to attempt to divert the
revolutionary goal of the revolutionary people to the stray path of
bourgeois welfare and make them forget the consolidation
and development of the socialist public ownership system and the
historical mission of continuing revolution under proletarian
dictatorship in order to facilitate the restoration of capitalism by Liu
Shao-ch'i, Lin Piao, and such swindlers.

### _"From Each according to His Ability, to Each according to His Labor" Is a Negation of the Exploitative System_

In socialist society, the social product belongs to the laboring people.
Does this mean that the whole social product can be distributed directly
to the laboring individuals in the production branches? Certainly not.
Marx pointed out in his [Critique of the Gotha Program] that
in socialist society, the following deductions should be made from the
gross social product before distribution: First, the replacement of the
consumed means of production; second, the augmentation for expanded
reproduction; and third, the establishment of reserve funds and
insurance funds for emergencies and natural disasters. In addition, the
following deductions have to be made before personal distribution:
First, administration expenses not related to production; second,
expenses for social needs such as schools and health facilities; and
third, funds for disabled persons, and so forth.
<a id="2">[[2]](#bot_2)</a> Today, in addition
to the above deductions, the socialist state must also establish foreign
aid funds to support the revolutionary struggles of the world's people.

What remains of the gross social product after necessary social
deductions becomes personal consumer goods that can be distributed to
the laborers in the production branches. In socialist society, the basic
principle for the distribution of personal consumer goods is "from each
according to his ability, to each according to his labor." This is to
say, every laborer must exert himself to the fullest possible extent in
social labor, and then society will distribute to him an amount of
consumer goods which corresponds with the amount of labor he provided.

The realization of the principle "From each according to his ability, to
each according to his labor" is a profound revolution in
the distribution system in history. In the several thousand years during
which class antagonism has existed in human society, there have been all
kinds of systems by which man exploited man, man oppressed man, and man
ate man according to the principle of "those who labor do not reap,
those who reap do not labor." In slave society, the slave owner treated
his slaves as talking tools. They were fed like livestock and led the
life of cattle and horses. In feudal society, the peasant had to deliver
50, 60, or even 80 percent of his harvest to the landlord while living
in abject poverty. In capitalist society, the wages from the worker's
labor are not enough to feed or clothe his family. Moreover, he is
constantly threatened by unemployment. Inequality in the ownership of
the means of production inevitably brought about this relationship
between the exploiter and the exploited in the distribution system. In
socialist society, public ownership of the means of production replaces
private ownership. This makes it possible to realize the principle of
"from each according to his ability, to each according to his labor,"
which benefits the laboring people. This principle takes labor as a
yardstick for the distribution of consumer goods. All able-bodied people
must participate in labor. Those who do not work do not eat. This is a
fundamental negation of the distribution system in which man exploited
man for several thousand years. It is an epochal advance in the
distribution system.

In socialist society, why must the distribution of personal consumer
goods follow the principle of "from each according to his ability, to
each according to his labor" rather than the principle of "from each
according to his ability, to each according to his need"? This is
because socialist society has just emerged from capitalist society, and
the disparities between the worker and the peasant, between the urban
and the rural areas, and between mental labor and physical labor still
exist. Labor still has not become the first requirement in the lives of
the majority of the people. The social product has not reached an
affluent level. And because class and class struggle exist in socialist
society, the exploitative class always spreads the evil
thoughts of "loving leisure and hating labor" and "reaping
without laboring" to poison the laboring people. Under these conditions,
it is not possible or practical to realize distribution according to
needs. Only the principle of "from each according to his ability, to
each according to his labor" meets the development needs of the
productive forces and can be understood and accepted by the broad masses
of laboring people.

Of course, distribution according to labor is still not the highest
ideal of the proletariat. What the proletariat tries to realize in the
future is the communist principle of "from each according to his
ability, to each according to his need." This is because equal rights
embodied in distribution according to labor still bear traces of the old
society. Just as Marx pointed out, "The principle followed is still
bourgeois legal rights."
<a id="3">[[3]](#bot_3)</a> The use of a
uniform yardstick --- labor --- to determine the distribution of
consumer goods leads to equality. But, conditions vary among laborers.
Some are stronger, while others are weaker. Some have to support more
people, and others only support a few people, and so forth. Under the
conditions in which an equal amount of labor obtains an equal amount of
compensation, the standard of living of those who are strong, skilled,
and have few mouths to feed is higher. For those in the reverse
situation, the standard of living is lower. De facto inequality results.
This inequality is fundamentally different from that in the old society.
Here, the issue of man exploiting man does not arise. But it is still a
"defect" compared with the ideal of common affluence among the
proletariat and the communist principle of from each according to his
ability, to each according to his need. "These defects are unavoidable
in the first stage of communist society when it has just emerged from
capitalist society after going through a prolonged period of birth
pangs. Rights can never exceed the development of the economic structure
of society and the culture of society which is determined by that
economic structure."
<a id="4">[[4]](#bot_4)</a>

On the one hand, the principle of distributing personal consumer goods
according to the labor provided is historically inevitable and cannot be
negated at will. On the other hand, it does have
shortcomings. As a result, it cannot thus be idealized or solidified.
With an ever-increasing abundance of the social product and an ever
higher communist consciousness among the people, there is a transition
process from distribution according to labor to distribution according
to need. In socialist society, there are some elements of distribution
according to need in the social welfare services run by the state or the
collective, such as the free medical care for staff and workers and the
labor insurance provided by the state. Therefore, at present, we must
adhere to the stage theory of revolutionary development and implement
the socialist principle of "from each according to his ability, to each
according to his labor." Furthermore, we must insist on the theory of
continuing revolution, actively create favorable conditions, gradually
increase the elements of distribution according to need and, when future
conditions are ripe, replace "distribution according to labor" with
"distribution according to need."

### _Avoid Two Tendencies in the Distribution of Personal Consumer Goods_

In socialist society, there is an acute struggle over the issue of
distribution according to labor. The Liu Shao-ch'i clique advocated high
wages, high bonuses, and high compensation for literary work. They
attempted to cause a gap between high and low in distribution to
undermine the solidarity among the people, discourage the production
activism of the laborer, obstruct the development of the productive
forces, and nurture a privileged class as a social basis for their
restoration of capitalism. This conspiracy of the Liu Shao-ch'i clique
was smashed during the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution.

To oppose polarization and gradually narrow disparities in distribution
is a revolutionary mission of the proletariat. In his summary of the
experience of the first proletarian government in the world, the Paris
Commune, Marx highly evaluated the practice by which "all public
employees, from the commune committee members on down, should receive
only a salary equivalent to a worker's wage" which was
adopted by the commune heroes.
<a id="5">[[5]](#bot_5)</a> He regarded that as
a great innovation and fully affirmed this revolutionary experience. In
the early period of the establishment of the Soviet government, Lenin
temporarily had to resort to high salaries for the bourgeois-educated
class because of the need for struggle. But he clearly pointed out: "The
corrupting effect of high salaries affects the Soviet government and
also the working masses. This is incontrovertible," and he deeply
criticized and repudiated high salaries.
<a id="6">[[6]](#bot_6)</a> Chairman Mao
consistently teaches us: "All our work cadres, whatever their status,
are the servants of the people."
<a id="7">[[7]](#bot_7)</a> He opposes high
salaries for the minority and demands us to rationally bring about a
gradual narrowing of the disparities in personal income between the
working personnel of the Party, the state, the enterprises, the people's
communes, and the people.

Why do the proletarian revolutionary teachers repeatedly remind us to
pay attention to this problem and repeatedly affirm the Paris Commune
principle? This is because a polarization in distribution is not
consistent with the socialist public ownership system and socialist
interrelations. In socialist society, the laboring people are masters of
the state and enterprises. Their labor skills are basically taught by
society. Their labor contribution to society may vary because of the
division of labor practiced in the old society and other conditions, but
differences in the standard of living cannot be too large. A gradual
narrowing of the three disparities is objectively required to advance on
the road of common affluence. Second, if the polarization in
distribution were allowed to develop, a privileged stratum in society
would be formed. It would serve as a social basis for a bourgeois
restoration of capitalism. This is unfavorable to the consolidation of
proletarian dictatorship. In today's Soviet Union, a bureaucratic
monopoly bourgeoisie who expropriates others' labor product has formed a
bourgeois privileged stratum. This is the new exploitative class
represented by the Brezhnev renegade clique which rules the laboring
people of the Soviet Union. Third, the polarization in distribution is
unfavorable to strengthening solidarity among the laboring
people. It also provides room for the bourgeois idea of fame and wealth.
Therefore, we must guard against this tendency.

To oppose polarization in distribution does not mean absolute
egalitarianism, which equalizes all labor compensation regardless of the
difficulty of the work and of differences in labor intensity and
contribution. The Paris Commune advocated that all state employees
should only get salaries equivalent to those of the worker. However, it
also accepted wage differentials among workers. This differential could
not be large, however. Absolute egalitarianism is totally inconsistent
with the socialist principle of "from each according to his ability, to
each according to his labor." It must be opposed. Chairman Mao pointed
out clearly more than forty years ago that: "... absolute egalitarianism
is a mere illusion of peasants and small proprietors, and that even
under socialism there can be no absolute equality, for material things
will then be distributed on the principle of 'from each according to his
ability, to each according to his work' as well as on that of meeting
the needs of the work."
<a id="8">[[8]](#bot_8)</a> As with
polarization in distribution, absolute egalitarianism hurts labor
activism, hinders production development, affects the increase of the
social product, and is unfavorable to socialist enterprise.

In socialist society, the distribution of personal consumer goods
requires, on the one hand, the implementation of the principle of
distribution according to labor and the acceptance of disparities. On
the other hand, we must also guard against polarization and
expropriating others' labor product. The standards of living among the
laborers must be gradually evened out to achieve common affluence. This
is a contradiction. Even if this contradiction is handled relatively
correctly under given conditions, new contradictions will arise when
these conditions change. This requires that we seriously study Marxism,
thoroughly understand the Party's policies, investigate and do research
in depth, closely rely on the masses, and correctly handle these
contradictions with proletarian politics in command.

<a id="There Are Two Basic Forms of Distribution of Personal Consumer Goods">[[There Are Two Basic Forms of Distribution of Personal Consumer Goods]](#bot_There Are Two Basic Forms of Distribution of Personal Consumer Goods)</a>
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _The Wage System Is the Chief Form of Distribution in the State Economy_

In the socialist stage, because commodity production and commodity
exchange still exist, a certain amount of money is paid by the state to
the staff and workers as labor compensation for a certain amount of
labor provided to society according to a fixed standard in the socialist
state ownership system. These money incomes of the staff and workers are
known as wages.

Wages under the socialist system are fundamentally different from wages
under the capitalist system. Under the capitalist system, labor power is
a commodity. Wages are incomes for the sale of labor power. They embody
the relations between the employer and the employee, between the
exploiter and the exploited, existing between the capitalist and the
worker. Under the socialist system, workers are masters of the state and
the enterprises. Labor power is not a commodity. It cannot be sold to
themselves. Wages are no longer a transformation of the value or price
of labor power. They are a form of state distribution of personal
consumer goods according to the principle of "from each according to his
ability, to each according to his labor."

There are two major forms of wages, namely, time-rate wages and
piece-rate wages. Time-rate wages are calculated on the basis of labor
time. Within a given period, a fixed wage is paid by the day or month
according to the wage level set by the socialist distribution principle.
Piece-rate wages are calculated on the basis of labor product. Wages are
paid at a per unit rate according to the number of pieces of product of
a certain quality which the laborer completes. In China, there is a
development process between these two forms of wages. Before 1958, the
piece-rate wage system was used in a large number of occupations and
jobs which were done by hand. This was consistent with the development
level of the productive forces in China and the degree of
ideological consciousness among the broad staff and workers. It was
instrumental in the recovery and development of production. However,
with the development of mechanization, automation, and the ideological
consciousness of the staff and workers, especially after the Great Leap
Forward in 1958, many defects and negative effects of the piecerate wage
system were revealed: (1) With technical progress, it was increasingly
difficult to implement individual piece-rates in many kinds of work.
Also piece-rate wages adversely affect technical innovation. (2) The
piece-rate system was unfavorable to solidarity among workers. It easily
led to contradictions between time-rate workers and piece-rate workers,
between new and old workers, between the upstream and downstream work
processes, and between workers of different shifts. (3) The piece-rate
system easily nurtured the idea of being primarily concerned with
personal income and not with the collective enterprise. It was also
unfavorable to elevating political and ideological consciousness.
Therefore, at the demand of the broad staff and workers, the piece-rate
system was abolished in most enterprises, and the time-rate system was
adopted. The form of wages used in China today is mainly time-rate
wages. Piece-rate wages are used only in some units and for some
varieties of work.

The issue of wages is a complicated one. It involves not only the
relations among the state, the collective, and the individual, but also
the relations among workers, between the worker and the peasant, and
between the worker and the peasant on the one hand and other laboring
people on the other. The issue of wages must be handled with extreme
seriousness and caution.

The experience in socialist revolution and construction shows that in
handling the issue of wages, we must firmly adhere to putting politics
in command and strengthening ideological education. We must also pay
attention to the following principles: On the basis of developing
production and increasing labor productivity, the wages of the staff and
workers are gradually increased, but not excessively. The magnitude of
wage increases cannot exceed the increase in labor productivity. To
determine wage standards and wage increases, an overall
arrangement must be made taking into account the relation between the
worker and the peasant. In determining wage scales of the staff and
workers, we must oppose the tendency toward polarization and greater
disparities and guard against any development that may lead to absolute
egalitarianism by denying wage differentiation. Increments in wages and
collective welfare must go hand in hand, so as to raise gradually the
ratio of collective welfare and to explore systematically and
conditionally the factors that will result in distribution according to
needs.

Under the socialist system, the conditions of distribution according to
need have improved with the development of production. Therefore, any
increase in the standard of living among the workers is reflected not
only in wage increases, but also in the improvement of the conditions of
distribution according to need, such as social welfare. In the modern
revolutionary Peking opera "The Harbor," the retired wharf worker Ma
Hung-liang sang: "In the new society, we wharf workers become proud
masters. We are taken care of in birth, old age, illness and death. The
benevolence of the Communist Party and Chairman Mao is higher than
heaven!" These sentences represent the true feelings of the working
class who are liberated in the new society. They reflect the immense
superiority of socialist production relations. It is very important to
understand the essential difference between capitalist wages and
socialist wages and the fundamental difference between the distribution
relations of the new and the old societies. It can strengthen our
responsibility as masters of our destiny and elevate the consciousness
of socialist labor.

### _The Work-Point System Is the Chief Form of Distribution in the Rural Collective Economy_

The distribution of personal consumer goods in the rural people's
commune under the collective ownership system also follows the principle
of "from each according to his ability, to each according to his labor."
However, because the degree of public ownership in the
collective ownership system is different from that in the state
ownership system, there are different characteristics in the concrete
form of distribution. In units under the state ownership system, the
means of production and products belong to the state and are allocated
and distributed centrally by the state. Therefore, labor compensation in
the whole society can be standardized and wages can be paid in money. In
the collective ownership system of the rural people's commune, the basic
system of "three-level ownership with the production team as the basis"
has been adopted at the present stage. The means of production and
products belong to various collective units. Therefore, distribution for
the whole society cannot be centralized. Even egalitarian distribution
among communes or among production teams is not possible. Distribution
can only be carried out independently within a collective unit according
to its own production conditions.

With the exception of commune-run enterprises, in which the wage system
is partially in force because their revenues are relatively stable,
distribution according to labor in the collective economy of the rural
people's commune is carried out by means of work evaluation and points
allotment. In some production teams, work points based on labor quotas
are also used for some farm activities according to the custom of the
masses. Work points are a standard with which to evaluate the amount of
the members' participation in collective labor. They are also a standard
for the distribution of labor compensation. The amount of income
obtained by a member from a production team is determined by the amount
of work points as well as by the money value of each work point
(work-point value). The money value of work points is not specified in
advance. It is determined by the annual income of the production team
after a certain amount of accumulation has been deducted. Because of the
differences in management and operation, techniques and equipment, and
natural and transportation conditions, the income of various production
teams varies. There may also be differences in accumulation deductions.
Therefore, the incomes of members in different production teams are not
uniform. These disparities should be gradually reduced by
actively helping the backward communes and teams catch up with the
advanced units. But absolute egalitarianism must be avoided, or the
development of agricultural production and the consolidation of the
collective economy will be adversely affected.

"We must make all efforts to increase year by year the personal income
of the peasant from the increase in production in normal years."
<a id="9">[[9]](#bot_9)</a> It is important
that this requirement be realized. It is not only favorable to
increasing the standard of living of the peasant, narrowing the
disparity between the worker and the peasant, but is also favorable to
consolidating and developing the collective economy and consolidating
proletarian political power.

How then can the income of the peasant be increased? Ultimately, we must
develop production before we can improve distribution. To develop
production, we must firmly adhere to putting proletarian politics in
command, educate the peasants with Marxism - Leninism - Mao Tse-tung
Thought, and establish the idea of farming for revolution in order to
mobilize fully the labor activism of the broad members. We must insist
on a thorough implementation of the policy of taking grain as the key
link to ensure all-round development and fully utilize the manpower,
material resources, and finance in the rural areas. We must strengthen
management and operation and practice scientific farming to increase
crop yields. We must budget carefully, practice economy, and find
substitutes to reduce costs as much as possible and increase production
and income, and so forth.

In calculating labor compensation for members, we must not only oppose
the method of having "work points in command," paying no attention to
ideological education, but must also carry out the principle of from
each according to his ability and to each according to his labor. Among
male and female members, "the principle of equal pay for equal work for
men and women must be carried out." Unequal pay for equal work in which
"men get ten work points for each labor day but women should not get
more than eight points" is contrary to the socialist distribution
principle.

<a id="Nurture the Communist Labor Attitude">[[Nurture the Communist Labor Attitude]](#bot_Nurture the Communist Labor Attitude)</a>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _Building Socialism and Realizing Communism Require the Nurturing of the Communist Labor Attitude_

In socialist society, the principle of "from each according to his
ability, to each according to his labor" in the distribution of personal
consumer goods must be carried out. This is for certain. But the
principle of "distribution according to labor" is not immune to change.
With change in conditions, it will gradually evolve into "distribution
according to need" and will be completely replaced by "distribution
according to need" when we advance into the communist society in the
future. This requires that we grasp the socialist distribution principle
in our work. But it also requires that we look further ahead,
publicizing and advocating the communist labor attitude.

What is communist labor? Lenin said: "In a relatively narrow and strict
sense, communist labor is social labor without compensation. This labor
is not labor to fulfill a certain obligation, to enjoy the right to
certain products, or labor performed under a quota specified in advance.
It is voluntary labor, labor without quotas, labor with no expectation
of compensation, and labor with no compensation conditions."
<a id="10">[[10]](#bot_10)</a>

Only after the proletariat seizes political power and when the laboring
people become masters of the state and enterprises can communist labor
arise and gradually develop. This is because under the exploitative
system, the laboring people all toil for the exploiting class.
Therefore, there cannot be any labor activism. In socialist society,
things are completely different. The laboring people have been
transformed from hired slaves into masters of the state and enterprises.
Every job and every labor product is related to the interests of the
laboring people. The laboring people no longer labor for the exploiter,
but for their own class. Therefore, there is an immense socialist
activism among the laboring people. This is a basic condition for the
gradual establishment of the communist labor attitude.

The appearance and gradual development of the communist
labor attitude is a significant event in the history of
human development. We should publicize it and applaud it. We should
extend it and forge it into a strong force for overthrowing the old
world and establishing the communist new world.

To establish the communist labor attitude is "a thorough breach with the
traditional ownership system," "a thorough breach with traditional
ideas." <a id="11">[[11]](#bot_11)</a> It is
also a prolonged battle in which the proletarian ideology defeats the
bourgeois ideology in the superstructure. If we did not break with "the
coldly calculating narrow vision which makes us unwilling to work a
little longer than others and unwilling to earn a little less than
others" <a id="12">[[12]](#bot_12)</a> and if
we did not penetratingly criticize and repudiate the capitalist moral of
working only for money, the proletarian ideology would not overrun this
battleground, the communist labor attitude could not be established, and
socialist revolution and construction would be hindered. Therefore, we
"should publicize the communist ideology morebroadly" so that more
comrades will become models who are willing to work hard and earn less.
<a id="13">[[13]](#bot_13)</a>

Establishing the communist labor attitude can accelerate socialist
construction and actively prepare favorable conditions for the
realization of communism. Communist society is a bright and perfect
society. It is a goal for the struggle of the proletariat and the
laboring people. It is an inevitable trend of social development.
However, communist society can only be achieved through the brave
struggle and diligent hard labor of millions of revolutionary people.
Before liberation, our revolutionary seniors had only five cents per
person per day for cooking oil, salt, and vegetables. They had no wages
or welfare. They struggled with imperialism, feudalism, and bureaucratic
capitalism under extremely difficult conditions for the liberation of
the proletariat. They worked hard and fought courageously. It was this
communist spirit that helped our revolutionary seniors to defeat the
reactionaries and establish a new China. Today, we still need to carry
on and foster this communist labor spirit of arduous labor without pay
and the revolutionary tradition of courageous struggle to build the
socialist society and to realize the communist society in the future.

### _In Nurturing the Communist Labor Attitude, We Must Criticize and Repudiate Material Incentives_

The appearance and gradual establishment of the communist labor attitude
indicate the gradual growth of the communist ideology and the gradual
decline of the capitalist ideology. Therefore, in the process of
nurturing and fostering the communist labor attitude, it is inevitable
that an acute struggle between the two classes, the two ideologies, and
the two lines will unfold. It is the nature of the bourgeoisie to be
attracted by money and profit. But the bourgeoisie generalizes it as
universal human nature. They say that "to work for money" is "human
nature" in order to poison the proletariat.

Modern revisionists try to replace the socialist principle of "from each
according to his ability, to each according to his labor" with "material
incentives." They treat the laboring people as hired slaves and think
that if money is not used as an incentive, there will not be any labor
activism. Soviet revisionists have consistently advocated "material
incentives." They have nonsensically declared that they are "a most
important lever" for increasing labor productivity. To advocate material
incentives, the Liu Shao-ch'i and Lin Piao clique even based their
argument on such fallacies as Confucius' saying that "the gentleman
pursues what is right, the small people seek what is profitable." They
claimed that "the drive to work is stimulated by material incentives"
and "production activism will not be high if we don't use a little more
money." They slanderously said that all there is in the heads of the
laboring people is "financial windfalls" and "wealth and treasure." They
regarded material incentives as a panacea which can "cure all
illnesses." Why did they make so much noise? Their ultimate intention
was to lead the laboring people to the stray path of bourgeois
individualism and to restore capitalism. The worker comrades put it
nicely: material incentives are the opiate to paralyze the revolutionary
combat spirit, sugarcoated arsenic and a soft dagger than can kill
without shedding a drop of blood.

In socialist society, the bourgeois preference for leisure over
labor is inevitably reflected among the laboring people so
that some of them do not work hard and their socialist labor activism is
not high. What can we do about such cases? Should we insist on having
politics in command and strengthening ideological education, or should
we rely on putting money incentives and cash in command? This is an
issue that involves which direction the proletariat and the laboring
people should follow. It is an issue of which road to follow.

Politics is the commander and the soul. Only by holding firmly to having
proletarian politics in command, doing a good job in ideology and
politics, continuously instilling in the broad masses the socialist and
communist ideology, criticizing and repudiating the capitalist tendency,
and at the same time seriously carrying out the principle of "from each
according to his ability, to each according to his labor" can the
socialist activism of the masses be fully mobilized. To educate the
laboring masses with Marxist ideology is meticulous work. It has to be
done with perseverance and a great deal of effort. But, the activism
thus mobilized is socialist, communist, solid, and long-lasting.

People who had been deeply affected by the poison of capitalist material
incentives behaved differently. They had a basic doubt about the effects
of ideological work. Some began by doing some ideological work, but
after a couple of unpleasant experiences, they would shake their heads
and think that there were no lasting effects to ideological work. They
would say: "It does not work. Only money can do the trick." They were
afraid of doing arduous and meticulous ideological work. Once
difficulties were encountered, they would resort to bonuses. But the
result was usually "the more rewards are given, the worse it gets.
Ideology is bankrupt and evil practices multiply." They were not good at
discovering the essence of socialist activism of the masses. They did
not have faith that anything can be transformed under certain
conditions. In fact, although the consciousness of the laboring people
may differ in level and in the rate of transformation,
favorable results would be achieved if we could hold firmly to putting
proletarian politics in command, doing ideological education and being
patient and meticulous in our work.

Chairman Mao consistently extols the communist labor attitude. He more
than once has called upon us to learn from the selfless spirit of
Comrade \[Norman\] Bethune and from the complete and thorough devotion
to the interests of the people of Comrade Chang Ssu-te. With the
nurturing of Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tsetung Thought, there have appeared
in China millions of Communist combatants like Comrades Bethune and
Chang Ssu-te. Their wholehearted devotion to revolution and to the
people will forever radiate the communist brilliance and encourage us to
advance courageously along the road of revolution!

### _Major Study References_

Marx, [Critique of the Gotha Program].

Lenin, "The Great Innovation," [Selected Works of Lenin],
Vol. 4.

Chairman Mao, "On Correcting Mistaken Ideas in the Party."

Chairman Mao, "On the Correct Handling of Contradictions among the
People," Sections 3, 7, 9.

### _Review Problems_

1\. How can the principle of "from each according to his ability, to each
according to his labor" be correctly understood and thoroughly
implemented?

2\. What are the essential differences between socialist wages and
capitalist wages?

3\. Why do we have to thoroughly implement the principle of "from each
according to his ability, to each according to his labor" as well as to
promote the communist labor attitude in the socialist stage?

[Notes]
--------------------------------

[\*](#bck_fn21_1) Ko-jen hsiao-fei-p'in tsai she-hui-chu-i
she-hui shih tsenyang fen-p'ei ti? --- "ko chin so neng, an lao
fen-p'ei" ti shehui-chu-i yuan-tse.

[1](#bck_fn21_2) Marx, [Critique of the Gotha Program,
Selected Works of Marx and Engels], Vol. 3, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 13.

[2](#bck_fn21_3) Ibid., pp. 9-10.

[3](#bck_fn21_4) Ibid., p. 11.

[4](#bck_fn21_5) Ibid., p. 12.

[5](#bck_fn21_6) Marx, [The Civil War in France, Selected
Works of Marx and Engels], Vol. 2, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she,
1972, p. 375.

[6](#bck_fn21_7) "Present Tasks of the Soviet Government,
"[Selected Works of Lenin], Vol. 3, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she,
1972, pp. 503-504.

[7](#bck_fn21_8) [Chi eh-fang jih-pao]
\[Liberation Daily\], Yenan, December 16, 1944.

[8](#bck_fn21_9) "On Correcting Mistaken Ideas in the Party,"
[Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung], Vol. 1, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 89.

[9](#bck_fn21_10) "On the Correct Handling of Contradictions
among the People," [Selected Readings from the Works of Mao
Tse-tung], Part 1, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1965, p. 344.

[10](#bck_fn21_11) "From Destroying Long-standing Old Systems
to Creating New Systems," [Selected Works of Lenin], Vol. 4,
Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 176.

[11](#bck_fn21_12) [Communist Manifesto, Selected Works of
Marx and Engels], Vol. 1, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, pp.
271-72.

[12](#bck_fn21_13) [State and Revolution, Selected Works of
Lenin], Vol. 3, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 254.

[13](#bck_fn21_14) "On New Democracy," [Selected Works of Mao
Tse-tung], Vol. 2, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 666.
