[*23* Communism Must Be Realized](content.xhtml#bck_Ch023) 
=======================================================================

[From the Socialist Society to the Communist
Society](content.xhtml#bck_Ch023)[\*](Ch023.xhtml#fn23_1)

Like all other historical production relations, socialist production
relations undergo a process of emergence, development, and extinction.
After a long period of movement, socialist production relations must
necessarily be transformed into communist production relations.
Communism is the highest ideal of the proletariat and the millions of
laboring people. It is the most perfect, most progressive, most
revolutionary, and most rational social system. It is a natural tendency
in human social development. It is the ultimate goal of proletarian
revolution. Chairman Mao pointed out: "The ultimate goal of all
Communists is to fight for the final attainment of socialist society and
communist society." <a id="1">[[1]](#bot_1)</a>
Every revolutionary warrior should struggle for communism all his life.

<a id="Communism Is Irresistible">[[Communism Is Irresistible]](#bot_Communism Is Irresistible)</a>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _Socialist Society Is a Necessary Stage on the Way to Communist Society_

Lenin pointed out, "The only thing mankind can do is to make the
transition directly from capitalism to socialism, namely,
to make the transition to the public ownership of the means
of production and to distribution according to labor."
<a id="2">[[2]](#bot_2)</a> In socialist
society, public ownership of the means of production has been
established, the laboring people have become masters of society and
enterprises, and Marxism has become the guiding thought of society. In
these respects, socialist society possesses elements of communism.
However, socialist society is merely the first stage of communist
society. It is still an incomplete communist society. In socialist
society, the bourgeoisie and all exploitative classes have been
overthrown, but the influence of these classes on the economy, politics,
and ideology will still exist for a long time to come. Disparities
between the worker and the peasant, between the urban and the rural
areas, and between mental and physical labor left behind by the old
society and remnants of bourgeois legal rights reflecting these
disparities will exist for a long time. In these respects, socialist
society is different from communist society.

The historical task of the proletariat in the socialist period is to
continuously sweep away capitalist elements and remnants in the
production relations and the superstructure, thoroughly defeat the
bourgeoisie, eliminate all classes and class differences, eliminate all
production relations based on these differences, eliminate all social
relations corresponding with such production relations, change all
concepts derived from these social relations, and push socialist society
toward a higher and more perfect communist society. Therefore, socialist
society becomes the necessary preparation for communist society, and
communist society is, in turn, a natural tendency in the development of
socialist society.

Then, what is a complete communist society?

### _Communist Society Is the Most Complete, Most Progressive, Most Revolutionary, and Most Rational Society_

There is a precise content to scientific communism. According to
Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tse-tung Thought, communist society is
a society that has completely eliminated classes and class disparities.
It is a society in which the whole people possess a high degree of
communist ideological consciousness and moral standards. It is a society
in which the whole people possess a high degree of labor activism and
initiative. It is a society in which the social product is abundant. It
is a society in which the principle of "from each according to his
ability and to each according to his need" is adopted. It is a society
in which the state will wither away.

Marx pointed out: "In a higher phase of communist society, after the
enslaving subordination of the individual to the division of labor, and
therewith also the antithesis between mental and physical labor, has
vanished; after labor has become not only a means of life but life's
prime want; after the productive forces have also increased with the
all-round development of the individual, and all the springs of
cooperative wealth flow more abundantly --- only then can the narrow
horizon of bourgeois right be crossed in its entirety and society
inscribe on its banners: "From each according to his ability, to each
according to his
need!"<a id="3">[[3]](#bot_3)</a>

According to the Marxist theory of scientific communism, the realization
of communist society requires the creation of the following conditions.

First, the thorough elimination of all classes and class disparities,
including the natural disparities between the worker and the peasant,
between the urban and the rural areas, between mental and physical
labor, and bourgeois legal rights reflecting these disparities. In
communist society, the basis for capitalist restoration will have been
thoroughly eliminated. At that time, Chairman Mao's "May 7 Directive"
will be fully realized. The whole people will become completely
developed new communists. People will consciously grasp the objective
law of social development and propel communist society continuously
forward. Of course, the elimination of classes and class disparities
does not mean that there will be no contradictions and no struggles in
communist society. At that time, there will still be contradictions
between the superstructure and the economic substructure
and between the production relations and the productive forces, and
there will be struggles between the advanced and the backward and
between correct and erroneous lines. Therefore, even in communist
society, it will still be necessary to continue revolution.

Second, the realization of a single communist system of ownership over
the means of production by the whole people. In communist society, the
communist system of ownership by the whole people will become the only
economic substructure. The most advanced communist production relations,
which are based on this ownership system, will guarantee that the
productive forces will develop at the fastest rate in order to increase
labor productivity at an ever-increasing pace. In order to realize
communist ownership by the whole people, it is necessary to create the
conditions in the socialist stage, gradually elevating socialist
collective ownership to socialist state ownership and then from
socialist state ownership to communist ownership by the whole people.
The people's commune created by the Chinese people is a suitable
organizational form for facilitating this transition.

Third, the creation of a very abundant social product. When communist
society is achieved, the social productive forces will have developed to
a new level. People's ability to conquer Nature will be tens of
thousands of times higher than it is now. At that time, people will
fully utilize all natural resources to serve human society and will
create a very abundant social product to satisfy the needs of the whole
society and all the laborers. At that time, commodity production will
have stopped. Commodities and money, which are in the domain of the
commodity economy, will finally be retired from the historical stage and
transferred to the museum of history. In communist society, the level of
development of the social productive forces cannot be compared with the
present level of development of the contemporary productive forces.
Therefore, if we are enthusiastic about the communist enterprise, we
should be enthusiastic about the development of the social productive
forces.

Fourth, the cultivation of a high degree of communist ideological
consciousness and moral standards among the whole people.
Communist society will thoroughly sweep away bourgeois thought and all
concepts of self-interest. The whole people will consciously transform
both themselves and the world with Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tse-tung
Thought. The whole world will assume a completely new appearance, and
the new thought, new culture, new customs, and new habits of the
proletariat will become common practice. Just as Chairman Mao pointed
out, "When the world has reached a point at which the whole of mankind
all consciouslytransforms itself and the world, then it is the communist
era of the world." <a id="4">[[4]](#bot_4)</a>
Of course, even at that time, there will still be contradictions between
the advanced and the backward, between the correct and the erroneous,
and between materialism and idealism, and struggle among people. But the
nature and form of the struggle will be different from those of the
class society.

Fifth, the adoption of the principle of "from each according to his
ability and to each according to his need." When communist society is
achieved, because the means of production will all have been brought
under a single communist system of ownership by the whole people and
because the social product will be very abundant and people's
ideological consciousness will have been greatly elevated, the
distribution of personal consumer goods will no longer be determined by
people's labor contribution to society but by their needs. Since the
essential difference between mental and physical labor will be
eliminated by then, every member of society will be able to exercise
fully his physical and mental capacity in labor. This will inevitably
lead to a profound change in the nature of labor. Labor will no longer
be merely a means to earn a living, but will also be the primary
necessity of people's lives. At that time, people's labor will no longer
be for the purpose of getting certain remuneration, but will be
conscious labor without remuneration and an important means of
consciously transforming the subjective and objective world.

Sixth, the state will automatically wither away. With a thorough
extinction of imperialism, capitalism, and exploitative
systems throughout the whole world and with the extinction
of classes and class disparities, the state as a means of class struggle
will naturally disappear. Chairman Mao pointed out: "When classes
disappear, all means of class struggle, parties, and state machinery
will gradually wither away as their historical missions are completed
because they no longer have any function to perform and there is no
longer any need for them. Human society will advance to a higher level."
<a id="5">[[5]](#bot_5)</a>

Chairman Mao instructed us a long time ago: "Communism is a whole
ideological system of the proletariat and is also a new social system.
This ideological and social system is different from any other
ideological system and any other social system. It is the most complete,
most progressive, most revolutionary, and most rational system since the
beginning of human history."
<a id="6">[[6]](#bot_6)</a> Communist society
is a society of boundless brilliance and boundless beauty. It is the
most ideal society of mankind.

### _Pseudocommunism Is Genuine Capitalism_

"The theoretical triumph of Marxism forces its enemies to disguise
themselves as Marxists. Such is the dialectics of history."
<a id="7">[[7]](#bot_7)</a> The Soviet
revisionist renegade clique and swindlers like Liu Shao-ch'i and Lin
Piao are contemporary pseudo-Marxists. They use the label "communism" to
engage in capitalist restoration.

The pseudocommunism of the Soviet revisionist renegade clique is a
typical representative of all sorts of contemporary pseudocommunism.
They start from such reactionary positions as "productivity first" and
"human nature" and foolishly say that "communism is the most humane and
benevolent ideological system," is "all for the people and all for
people's happiness," and is a good dish of "beef with beans." They never
mention the thorough extinction of all classes, class disparities, and
the bourgeois legal rights reflecting these disparities. They completely
empty the revolutionary content of scientific communism. This brand of
communism is not only false, but also very reactionary.
This is "communism" centered on the decaying bourgeois outlook. This is
"communism" modeled on the bourgeois life style. This is pseudocommunism
and genuine capitalism.

In China, the Lin Piao clique of renegades also strove to advocate
pseudocommunism. They foolishly said that communism •was "public
propertyism," that "'property' is the word to be stressed on the
banner," and that communism was to make "everyone rich." The renegade
clique never talked about eliminating the landlord and the bourgeoisie;
all they cared about were the words "public" and "property." What
class's "public" was it? What class's "property" was it? It is obvious.
Their so-called "public" was what Confucius and his kind advocated:
"When the great Tao prevails in the world, a public spirit will rule all
under Heaven." Hence, it was the slave owner's "public," the landlord's
"public," and the bourgeoisie's "public" I The so-called "property" was
the slave owner's "property," the landlord's "property," and the
bourgeoisie's "property." Getting rich could only mean that the handful
of exploitative classes would become millionaires. Had the renegades
succeeded in carrying out their conspiracies, the proletariat and the
broad masses of laborers would have once again lost all the means of
production and would once again have been reduced to slaves in the abyss
of hardship and suffering. This is what has happened in the Soviet
Union. The Soviet revisionist renegade clique has already expropriated
the wealth created jointly by the proletariat and the broad masses of
laborers. It has be-come the "public property" of a handful of
bureaucratic monopoly bourgeoisie. The broad masses of people of the
Soviet Union are once again leading the miserable life of the czarist
period and are trapped in an abyss of agony. Chairman Mao pointed out
incisively, "Today's Soviet Union is a bourgeois dictatorship, a big
bourgeois dictatorship, German fascist dictatorship, and Hitler-style
dictatorship." <a id="8">[[8]](#bot_8)</a>
Therefore, it is evident that the "public propertyism" advocated by the
Lin Piao clique contradicts the scientific communism of Marxism and is
the same type of stuff as the pseudocommunism of Soviet revisionism.

The history of the communist movement clearly shows:
communism is irresistible. No matter how the reactionary tries to
obstruct the forward movement of the wheel of history, communism will
finally win a thorough victory in the whole world.

<a id="The Realization of Communism Is a Profound Social Revolution">[[The Realization of Communism Is a Profound Social Revolution]](#bot_The Realization of Communism Is a Profound Social Revolution)</a>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _Uphold the Idea That Continuing Revolution under Proletarian Dictatorship Is the Only Path for Realizing Communism_

In the transformation from socialist society to communist society, the
proletariat must thoroughly defeat the bourgeoisie and its ideology and
eliminate all classes and class disparities. Therefore, whether in
production relations or in the superstructure, this transformation is a
great stride in quality and is a series of profound social revolutions.

State power under proletarian dictatorship, "to the victorious people,
is as indispensable as cloth and cereals. This is a very good thing, a
magic weapon that protects us, an inherited magic weapon. This magic
weapon should never be discarded before foreign imperialism and domestic
classes have been thoroughly eliminated."
<a id="9">[[9]](#bot_9)</a> On the basis of
the fundamental principles of Marxism, Chairman Mao summed up the
historical experience of proletarian dictatorship and put forth the
theory of continuing revolution under proletarian dictatorship.
Following the theory of continuing revolution under proletarian
dictatorship requires that we be good at applying the standpoint,
concept, and methodology of Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tse-tung Thought in
observing and analyzing socialist society and that we adhere to the
Party's General Line for the whole historical stage of socialism as the
key link for further strengthening the proletariat's total dictatorship
over the bourgeoisie in the political, economic, ideological, cultural,
and educational spheres. This is the basic guarantee for building
socialism and making the transition to communism.

Whether or not proletarian dictatorship is firmly upheld
and whether or not continuing revolution under proletarian dictatorship
is firmly upheld are important indicators of whether we are developing
toward communism or retrogressing toward capitalism. The Soviet
revisionist renegade clique tries hard to distort the theory of Marxist
scientific communism, claiming that no revolution, class struggle, or
proletarian dictatorship are necessary in the transition from socialism
to communism. They foolishly say that "there are no antagonistic classes
in socialist society. Therefore, the realization of the transition from
socialism to communism does not have to go through social revolution or
class antagonism." Although this renegade clique also advocates the
realization of communism, it is merely a smoke screen to deceive the
people, sabotage proletarian dictatorship, and restore capitalism. It is
through the negation of the basic Marxist theory about the existence of
classes, class contradictions, and class struggle that the Soviet
revisionist renegade clique abolishes proletarian dictatorship, ceases
continuing revolution under proletarian dictatorship, mobilizes the
bourgeoisie to attack the proletariat, changes proletarian dictatorship
into bourgeois dictatorship, and changes the socialist system into the
capitalist system.

Only by adhering to continuing revolution under proletarian dictatorship
can proletarian dictatorship be consolidated, the restoration of
capitalism be prevented, socialism be built, and all the conditions
necessary for the realization of communism be created. To thoroughly
implement continuing revolution under proletarian dictatorship is a
necessary road for realizing communism.

### _Hold Firmly to Proletarian Internationalism and Support World Revolution_

The era we are in is the era of imperialism and proletarian revolution.
Chairman Mao pointed out, "Since the birth of this monster of
imperialism, things in the world are joined together and can no longer
be separated."
<a id="10">[[10]](#bot_10)</a> To
realize communism, we must thoroughly eliminate imperialism, capitalism,
and all systems in which man exploits man, so that the whole of mankind
can be thoroughly liberated. Therefore, the seizure of political power
in one country or several countries and the establishment of a socialist
society by the proletariat do not mean the end of revolution. Only by
liberating the whole of mankind can the proletariat finally liberate
itself. This is because capital is an international force. As long as
imperialism, capitalism, and exploitative systems still exist,
imperialism and social imperialism will certainly use the two
reactionary methods of armed intervention and peaceful fragmentation to
oppose the socialist countries. Under these conditions, the socialist
state will always face the threats of aggression and sabotage from
imperialism and social imperialism. Since capital is an international
force, the proletarian enterprise cannot but be an international
enterprise. When the Russian proletariat seized political power in the
October Revolution and was unfolding the socialist revolution and
socialist construction, Lenin clearly and precisely pointed out, "Only
by relying on the common efforts of the workers of various countries and
throughout the whole world can there be a final victory."
<a id="11">[[11]](#bot_11)</a> In his struggle
with Trotsky, Stalin firmly adhered to, and defended, Leninism. But, the
Khrushchev-Brezhnev renegade clique repeatedly claimed that in the
Soviet Union, "socialism has achieved not only a complete victory, but a
thorough victory." This is a downright betrayal of Leninism.
Domestically, the purpose of the ridiculous claims of this renegade
clique was to overlook the acute struggles between the proletariat and
the bourgeoisie and conceal their conspiracy to restore capitalism
internally. Abroad, it was to spread the illusion that the aggressive
nature of imperialism has changed and conceal their ugly countenance in
their struggle for hegemony with the other "superpower."

Against the distortion and betrayal of Leninism by modern revisionism,
Chairman Mao carries on, expounds, and extends Leninism. Chairman Mao
pointed out: "We have already attained a great victory. But, the
defeated classes will still struggle. These people still exist. This
class still exists. Therefore, we cannot talk about a final
victory. We may not be able to say this for several decades. We cannot
lose our vigilance. According to the viewpoint of Leninism, the final
victory in one socialist country requires not only the efforts of its
own proletariat and its broad masses of people, but must also wait for
the victory of world revolution, the elimination of systems in which man
exploits man, and the liberation of the whole of mankind. Therefore, to
talk lightly about a final victory in our revolution is erroneous and
inconsistent with Leninism. It is also contrary to the facts."
<a id="12">[[12]](#bot_12)</a> To attain a
final victory in the socialist revolution and to realize communism in
the whole world, the proletariat of various countries is holding high
the banner of proletarian internationalism, supporting each other,
struggling together, and advancing courageously along the Marxist
general line of international communism.

In the era of imperialism and proletarian revolution, part of the
capitalist system has already entered the museum (in socialist states);
the moribund rest, like a setting sun dangling precariously on a western
hill, is struggling for its last breath and will soon too enter the
museum. It is the communist doctrine and its social system which are
sweeping over the world like ten thousand thunderbolts striking at the
same time, powerful as towering mountains and mighty as billowing
oceans, and it shall ever retain its youth and vitality. Marxist
political economy uses the objective law of human societal development
to analyze the process of movement of the production relations of
various social forms and arrives at the scientific conclusion that the
capitalist system will surely perish and that the socialist and
communist systems will surely win out. It points out the general
tendency of historical development and is a powerful ideological weapon
for the proletariat in making revolution.

The characteristic of the present international situation is that "the
world is in a big mess." This "mess" is a reflection of the
intensification of various basic contradictions in the contemporary
world. It accelerates the disintegration and decline of corrupt
reactionary power and promotes the awakening and strengthening of the
newly emerging people's power. In the situation of "a big
mess," rapid and drastic dissolution and reorganization occur after a
prolonged period of contest and struggle among the various political
forces of the world. A number of Asian, African, and Latin American
countries have obtained independence one after another and play an
increasing role in international affairs. The socialist camp that
existed briefly after the war no longer exists because the Soviet Union,
once a socialist state, has become a social-imperialist state. Owing to
the law of uneven development in capitalism, the Western imperialist
bloc is also disintegrating. Looking at it from the changes in
international relations, there are three related, and yet opposed,
aspects and three worlds in the contemporary world. American imperialism
and Soviet revisionism are the First World. These two superpowers vainly
attempt to dominate the world and are the biggest international
exploiters, aggressors, and source of new world wars. They possess large
amounts of nuclear weapons and are engaged in a heated arm ament race.
Externally, they station large numbers of soldiers, maintain large
numbers of military bases, continuously control, sabotage, interfere
with, and invade other countries, and exploit other countries
economically. When it comes to bullying other people, Soviet revisionist
imperialism, waving the socialist banner, is even more malicious. The
developing countries in Asia, Africa, and Latin America and other
countries are the Third World. They are oppressed and exploited by
colonialism and imperialism. They are the revolutionary motive power
that pushes the wheel of history forward and are a major impetus in
opposing colonialism, imperialism, and especially the superpowers. The
developed countries between the First and Third Worlds are the Second
World. Their conditions are complex. Some of them still maintain some
forms of colonial relations with the countries in the Third World. At
the same time, all these developed countries are subject to some extent
to control, threats, and unfair treatment from this or that superpower.
They have a varying desire to free themselves from the enslavement and
control of the superpowers and to defend their national independence and
the integrity of their sovereignty. China is a socialist
state and is also a developing country. China belongs to the Third
World. The Chinese people have consistently followed Chairman Mao's
teachings, resolutely supported the struggle of the oppressed people and
nations to fight for and defend national independence, and opposed
colonialism, imperialism and hegemony. They stand with the people of the
Third World and the whole world to push the wheel of history forward.

History develops through struggle. The world pushes forward amidst
instability. The dawn of a new world in which there will be no
imperialism, no capitalism, and no exploitative systems is just ahead of
us. The great Chairman Mao teaches us, "The future is bright but the
road is treacherous."
<a id="13">[[13]](#bot_13)</a> Let us raise
high the victorious banner of Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tsetung Thought,
unite with the world's proletariat and the oppressed people and nations
of the world, be determined, fear no sacrifice, and overcome all
difficulties to win a victory!

### _Major Study References_

Marx and Engels, [Communist Manifesto].

Marx, [Critique of the Gotha Program].

Lenin, [State and Revolution], Chapter 5.

Chairman Mao, "On New Democracy."

### _Review Problems_

1\. What are the relationships and differences between the communist
society and the socialist society? What is the crux of pseudocommunism?

2\. What conditions must be created to realize communism? Why do we say
that the realization of communism is a profound social revolution?

3\. How does a revolutionary warrior establish a vast communist ideal and
fight for communism all his life?

[Notes]
--------------------------------

[\*](#bck_fn23_1) Kung-ch'an-chu-i i-tingyao shih-hsien ---
ts'ung she-huichu-i she-hui tao kung-ch'an-chu-i she-hui.

[1](#bck_fn23_2) "The Chinese Revolution and the Chinese
Communist Party," [Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung], Vol. 2,
Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 614.

[2](#bck_fn23_3) "The Tasks of the Proletariat in Our
Revolution," [Selected Works of Lenin], Vol. 3, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 62.

[3](#bck_fn23_4) Marx, [Critique of the Gotha Program,
Selected Works of Marx and Engels], Vol. 3, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 12.

[4](#bck_fn23_5) "On Practice," [Selected Works of Mao
Tse-tung], Vol. 1, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 273.

[5](#bck_fn23_6) "On the People's Democratic Dictatorship,"
[Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung], Vol. 4, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 1357.

[6](#bck_fn23_7) "On New Democracy," [Selected Works of Mao
Tse-tung], Vol. 2, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, pp. 646-47.

[7](#bck_fn23_8) "The Historical Destiny of the Doctrine of
Marx," [Selected Works of Lenin], Vol. 2, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 439.

[8](#bck_fn23_9) Quoted from [Jen-min jih-pao]
\[People's Daily\], April 22, 1970.

[9](#bck_fn23_10) "Why It Is Necessary to Discuss the White
Paper" [Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung], Vol. 4, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1968, pp. 1391-92.

[10](#bck_fn23_11) "On Tactics against Japanese Imperialism,"
[Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung], Vol. 1, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 147.

[11](#bck_fn23_12) "Report on Foreign Policy to the Joint
Conference of the Central Executive Committee of the All Russia and the
Moscow Soviet," [Complete Works of Lenin], Vol. 27, p. 346.

[12](#bck_fn23_13) Quoted from [Hung-ch'i] \[Red
Flag\], 1969, No. 5.

[13](#bck_fn23_14) "On the Chungking Negotiations," [Selected
Works of Mao Tse-tung], Vol. 4, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968,
p. 1061.
