["Youth Self-Education Series" Editors' Note](#)
==================================================================================

Chairman Mao teaches us that "it is necessary for educated youths to go
to the countryside to be reeducated by the poor and lower-middle
peasants." In the past few years, in response to Chairman Mao's great
call, thousands upon thousands of educated youths rushed to China's
countryside and frontier with revolutionary enthusiasm. They have
earnestly studied works by Marx, Lenin, and Chairman Mao, actively
participated in criticizing Lin Piao and rectifying the style of work,
energetically fought in the front line of the Three Great Revolutionary
Movements, resolutely followed the path of allying with the workers and
peasants, and made new contributions to the building of a socialist
countryside. Their awareness about class struggle and line struggle has
been greatly elevated. Countless proletarian heroes have suddenly
emerged, and a whole new generation of revolutionary youths is maturing
healthily. This is a great victory for Chairman Mao's revolutionary
line.

Following Chairman Mao's instruction that "we must concern ourselves
with the growth of the younger generation" and in order to meet the need
for self-study of educated youths who go to the countryside and
mountainous areas, the "Youth's Self-Education Series" was written and
published. This series is guided by Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tse-tung
Thought and includes fundamentals of philosophy, social sciences,
natural sciences and selections from the works of Lu Hsün. We hope its
publication will contribute to the self-study of educated youths who go
to the countryside and mountainous areas, help them to further elevate
their awareness about line struggle, their political consciousness, and
their cultural and scientific levels so that they can advance along the
road of being both red and expert and better fulfill the needs of
building a socialist new countryside and other enterprises.

We are grateful to the support given to the publication of this series
by the units concerned and the authors, and we welcome the suggestions
and criticisms of readers of this series so that we can make
improvements.

Shanghai People's Press
