[*1* Learn Some Political Economy](#) 
=====================================================================

[The Object of Political
Economy](#)<a id="s_a">[\*](#bot_s_a)</a>

The great Chairman Mao teaches us over and over again to learn some
political economy. This is not only a requirement for Communist Party
members and revolutionary cadres; it is also a requirement for every
combatant in the Three Great Revolutionary Struggles. To learn some
political economy is very important for understanding Marxism, for
penetratingly criticizing revisionism and transforming our world outlook
of our own accord, and especially for a deeper appreciation of the
Party's basic line and policies in the whole socialist historical stage.

The youths fighting in the front lines of the countryside and factories
are our country's hope and the successors to the proletarian
revolutionary enterprise. To better engage in combat, to grow healthily
and more quickly, the youths must learn some political economy.

The Object of Political Economy Is Production Relations
---------------------------------------------------------------------

What kind of science is political economy? We must start from its object
of study. The object of study for Marxist political economy is
production relations. Engels clearly pointed out that "what economics
investigates is not things, but the relations among people and
ultimately the relations among classes."
<a id="1">[[1]](#bot_1)</a> How do production
relations among people arise? We must start from man's productive
activities.

Chairman Mao said, "Marxists regard man's production activities as the
most basic practical activities which determine all other activities."
<a id="2">[[2]](#bot_2)</a> But, over a hundred
years ago, before Marxism was created, people did not have this
scientific understanding. Thinkers of the exploiting class all opposed
this viewpoint. They either championed the fallacy that human society
developed according to God's will or peddled the heresy of heroes
creating history. These so-called thinkers glossed over the simplest
fact, namely, that people must first be able to feed, clothe, and
shelter themselves before they can engage in politics, science, fine
arts, and religious activities. If people need food, clothing, and
shelter, they must engage in productive activities. Therefore, the
direct production of material commodities forms the basis of human
societal development. Without the productive activities of the laboring
class, people cannot survive, and society cannot develop. It was Marx
who discovered this law of development in human history.

To produce, people must form certain mutual relationships. Isolated
individuals cannot engage in production. Just as Marx pointed out: "To
engage in production, people form certain associations and
relationships. Only within these social associations and relationships
can there be a relation between them and Nature and can there be
production." <a id="3">[[3]](#bot_3)</a> These
relations formed by people during the production process are called
production relations. In class society, these relations are ultimately
reflected in class relationships.

Production relations consist of three aspects: (1) the ownership pattern
of the means of production; (2) people's roles in production and their
mutual relations; (3) the pattern of product distribution. The ownership
pattern refers to who owns the means of production (including means of
labor, such as machines, plants, and land, and objects of labor, such as
raw materials). In production relations, the most important aspect is
the ownership pattern of the means of production. It is the basis of
production relations. The ownership pattern of the means of
production determines the nature of production relations. Primitive
society, slave society, feudal society, capitalist society, and
socialist society in human societal development are classified according
to the differences in their ownership patterns of the means of
production. The ownership pattern determines people's roles in
production and their mutual relations and thus the distribution pattern
of products.

To produce, it is necessary not only to have relations among people but
also relations between man and Nature. Man must conquer and transform
Nature. The power which man uses to conquer and transform Nature is
called productive forces. Productive forces are composed of men and
materials (namely, means of production). In productive forces, tools of
production are the most important. The types of tools used for
production reflect the magnitude of man's power to conquer Nature. But
we cannot regard tools of production as the determining factor in
productive forces. "The determining factor is man, not materials."
<a id="4">[[4]](#bot_4)</a> "Of all things in the
world, man is the most valuable."
<a id="5">[[5]](#bot_5)</a> Because tools have to
be used by man, created by man, and renovated by man, without man, there
would be no tools and no know-how. Without man, the best "automatic"
tools are never really "automatic."

Production relations and productive forces comprise the two aspects of
social production. In overall historical development, productive forces
are generally revealed as the major determining factor. Any
transformation of production relations is necessarily a result of a
certain development in productive forces. Production relations must be
compatible with productive forces. When certain production relations
become incompatible with the development of productive forces, these
production relations must be replaced by some other new production
relations which better match the development in productive forces. This
is to say, the form of production relations is not determined by man's
subjective will, but by the level of development of productive forces.
Production relations must conform to the development of productive
forces. This is an objective law which is not subject to change
according to people's will. The emergence, development, and
extinction of certain production relations unfold with a corresponding
evolution of the contradictions of certain productive forces. Therefore,
in the study of production relations, Marxist political economy also
studies productive forces.

In the overall development of history, if productive forces are revealed
to be the major determining factor, does it mean that production
relations are entirely passive compared with productive forces?
Definitely not. When production relations are compatible with productive
forces, they exert an active impetus to the development of productive
forces. When production relations become incompatible with productive
forces, they will hinder the development of productive forces. As
productive forces cannot be developed without changing production
relations, the transformation of production relations plays a major
determining role. When old China was under the rule of imperialism,
feudalism, and bureaucratic capitalism, the landlord and the comprador
represented the most reactionary and backward production relation of
China. Productive forces were severely restricted and sabotaged. Before
liberation, China did not have any machine-building industry or any
automobile or airplane manufacturing. The annual output of steel was
only several hundred thousand tons outside of Northeast China. Even
daily necessities were imported. Cloth was called foreign cloth;
umbrellas were called foreign umbrellas. Even a tiny nail was called a
foreign nail. Under those circumstances, the overthrow of the rule of
imperialism, feudalism, and bureaucratic capitalism, the transformation
of comprador-feudal production relations, and the establishment of
socialist production relations played an important role in promoting the
development of productive forces.

Big development of productive forces often occurs after the
transformation of production relations. This is a universal law. Big
development of productive forces in capitalist society also occurred
after the disintegration of feudal production relations induced by the
bourgeois revolution and the rapid development of capitalist production
relations. Take England, for example, where big development
of productive forces occurred on the basis of the bourgeois revolution
in the seventeenth century and the Industrial Revolution of the late
eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. The modern industries of
France, Germany, the United States, and Japan rapidly developed only
after the old superstructure and production relations had been
transformed in various ways. On the issue of production relations and
productive forces, one of the principal aspects of the long struggle
between the Marxists and the Soviet revisionists has always been whether
one should insist on taking the dialectical unity viewpoint or should
expound the reactionary productivity-first viewpoint. Lin Piao, in
league with Ch'en Po-ta, advocated that the major task after the Ninth
Party Congress was to develop production. This is a copy of the
revisionist fallacy inserted into the Resolution of the Eighth Party
Congress by Liu Shao-ch'i and Ch'en Po-ta which pointed out "the
contradiction between the advanced socialist system and the backward
social productive forces." In China, socialist production relations are
basically compatible with the development of the productive forces. This
opens up a new horizon for the development of the productive forces. But
it also has its imperfect aspects. And these imperfections contradict
the development of the productive forces. The experience of socialist
revolution teaches us that it is always the superior socialist system
which promotes the development of the productive forces. It is always
after the transformation of those parts of production relations which
are incompatible with the development of the productive forces that the
development of the productive forces is promoted. Where is "the
contradiction between the advanced socialist system and the backward
social productive forces"? The criminal intent of Liu Shao-ch'i's, Lin
Piao's, and other similar swindlers' advocacy of this fallacy was to
vainly attempt to use the productivity-first viewpoint as a weapon to
oppose the continuing revolution under the proletarian dictatorship and
the basic Party policy laid down by Chairman Mao for the socialist
stage. This is their impossible dream.

Production relations must be compatible with productive forces.
The development of productive forces necessitates the
destruction of old production relations which are not compatible with it
and their replacement by new production relations which are compatible
with its development. But the process of disintegration of old
production relations and the appearance of new production relations
cannot be a smooth one. The transformation of old production relations
and the establishment and perfection of new production relations are
often realized only after revolutionary struggles. Therefore, if one
wants to understand how old production relations are transformed and new
production relations are established and perfected, it is not enough to
explain in terms of the contradictions between production relations and
productive forces. The relations between the superstructure and the
economic substructure must also be investigated.

The superstructure refers to the national government, army, law, and
other political systems and their corresponding ideological forms, such
as philosophy, literature, and fine arts. The economic substructure is
production relations. "The sum total of these production relations forms
the economic substructure of society, the real basis upon which a legal
and political superstructure arises and to which definite social forms
of consciousness correspond."
<a id="6">[[6]](#bot_6)</a> This statement by Marx
scientifically explains the relation between the superstructure and the
economic substructure.

In the contradiction between the superstructure and the economic
substructure, the latter, in general, is the determining force. The
economic substructure determines the superstructure. With change in the
economic substructure, "the whole immense superstructure is slowly or
rapidly transformed."
<a id="7">[[7]](#bot_7)</a> This is to
say, the old economic substructure has disintegrated, and the
superstructure built upon this foundation must also disintegrate. But
the rate of its disintegration varies. When reactionary state machinery
has been transformed, the reactionary classes do not willingly bow out
of the historical stage with the disappearance of the old economic
substructure. They inevitably engage in prolonged and desperate struggle
with the advanced classes in the political, ideological, and cultural
spheres. In particular, old ideological forms associated with the
overthrown classes remain for a long time.

The superstructure is determined by the economic substructure. Once it
is established, it has an immense negative effect on the economic
substructure. Stalin pointed out, "The substructure creates its
superstructure to serve its own establishment and consolidation and to
destroy the old substructure and its superstructure."
<a id="8">[[8]](#bot_8)</a> This explains why the
superstructure always serves its economic substructure. The socialist
superstructure serves its socialist economic substructure, and the
capitalist superstructure serves its capitalist economic substructure.

In capitalist society, with the intensification of the contradictions
between the socialization of production and the private ownership of
means of production, there is an urgent need to replace capitalist
private ownership with socialist public ownership. But the bourgeoisie
controls the reactionary state machinery and uses it to maintain the
capitalist economic substructure. If the proletariat does not first
smash the capitalist state machinery, it is impossible to destroy the
capitalist economic system. The new and old revisionists' claim that
"capitalism can peacefully grow into socialism" is all a pack of lies.

In socialist society, the superstructure and the economic substructure
are basically compatible. But due to the existence of the bourgeoisie
and its ideological forms, some bureaucratic styles of work in the state
organs, and defects in certain parts of the state system, the
consolidation, perfection, and development of the socialist economic
substructure was hindered or undermined. We must make the socialist
superstructure better serve the socialist economic substructure. We must
firmly grasp the struggle in the superstructure and carry the socialist
revolution in the superstructure to the end.

Political economy touches upon the most practical and immediate
interests of various classes and strata. It explains the most acute and
intense problems of class struggle. Marxist political economy, like
Marxist philosophy, publicly proclaims that it is at the service of
proletarian politics. Political economy is a science about class
struggle.

Political Economy Is the Theoretical Basis for the Party's Defining the Basic Line
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Marxist political economy was born with the appearance of the modern
proletariat and the big productive forces --- big industries. Marx
participated in the class struggles of his time. He used revolutionary
materialist dialectics to analyze the capitalist society. He revealed
the secrets of how the capitalists exploited the workers and
scientifically demonstrated the contradictions between the socialization
of production and capitalist ownership. These contradictions were
manifested as acute antagonism between the proletariat and the
bourgeoisie. With the daily development of capitalist social
contradictions, the proletariat, who acted as the gravediggers of the
capitalist system, daily strengthened. 'The knell of capitalist private
property will soon be struck. The expropriators will be expropriated."
<a id="9">[[9]](#bot_9)</a> From this, the
revolutionary and scientific conclusion of the inevitable replacement of
the capitalist system by the socialist system and the bourgeois
dictatorship by the proletarian dictatorship was arrived at. "This
conclusion was a rrived at by Marx according to the law of economic
motion in modern society."
<a id="10">[[10]](#bot_10)</a> Thus, Marxist
political economy, along with Marxist philosophy and scientific
socialism, became the theoretical basis for the proletarian political
party to formulate its basic policy. On the theoretical basis of Marxism
and under capitalist conditions, the proletarian revolutionary leaders
formulated for the proletarian party the basic political line of using
revolutionary violence to seize political power. They guided the
proletariat to struggle for the complete overthrow of the bourgeoisie
and all exploiting classes, the replacement of bourgeois dictatorship by
proletarian dictatorship, the triumph of socialism over capitalism, and
the realization of communism.

In socialist society, Marxist political economy still provides the
theoretical basis for the proletarian party 's formulation of basic
lines. Chairman Mao has penetratingly analyzed the contradictions
between socialist production relations and productive forces
and between the superstructure and the economic substructure and has
demonstrated the long duration and complexity of class struggle and line
struggle in the socialist pèriod.

On this theoretical basis, he further formulated the basic line for our
Party for the entire socialist stage. This basic line tells us:
"Socialist society covers a considerably long historical period.
Throughout this historical period, there are classes, class
contradictions, and class struggle, there is the struggle between the
socialist road and the capitalist road, there is the danger of
capitalist restoration, and there is the threat of subversion and
aggression by imperialism and social imperialism. These contradictions
can be resolved only by depending on the theory of continued revolution
under the dictatorship of the proletariat and on practice under its
guidance." <a id="11">[[11]](#bot_11)</a> The
Party's basic line guides the Chinese people to persist in continuing
revolution under the proletarian dictatorship, to struggle for the
consolidation of the proletarian dictatorship, the prevention of
capitalist restoration, and the building of socialism, and to struggle
for the great ideal of worldwide realization of communism.

The basic task of socialist political economy is to study and illustrate
the law of transformation from socialist production relations to
communist production relations. Some understanding of political economy
helps us to understand the objective law of socialist economic motion
and the inevitability of the association, distinction, and development
of various production relations. This will increase our understanding of
the Party's basic line and elevate our awareness about implementing it.

It is of fundamental importance to insist on the Party's basic line. It
is simply "to carry out Marxism, not revisionism." To carry out Marxism,
we must first learn Marxism. To oppose revisionism, we must be able to
tell what revisionism is. But, Marxism consists of philosophy, political
economy, and scientific socialism. If we want to understand Marxism, we
must seriously study Marxist philosophy and scientific socialism, but we
must also seriously study Marxist political economy.

Marxist political economy is in opposition to all bourgeois and
revisionist political economy, and it developed from the
process of challenging bourgeois and revisionist political
economy. Learning Marxist political economy helps to distinguish between
Marxism and revisionism, between socialism and capitalism, and between
the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. It will also correct tendencies
toward deviation and elevate our ideological awareness.

In summary, we must study some political economy if we want to overcome
anti-Party, anti-Marxist thinking, better carry through the Party's
basic line for the socialist stage, more penetratingly unfold the
criticism of Lin Piao and the rectification of the style of work, and
score new and greater victories in the great socialist revolution and
socialist enterprise.

Combine Theory with Practice to Learn Political Economy Well
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Political economy is a demonstration and application of dialectical
materialism and historical materialism. To learn political economy, we
must follow the guidance of dialectical materialism and historical
materialism. "The dialectical method attempts to understand every set
pattern through its continuous motion and its temporary nature. It does
not worship anything, and it is critical and revolutionary in
nature."<a id="12">[[12]](#bot_12)</a>
This proletarian world outlook is in direct opposition to idealism and
metaphysics. Only after we fully appreciate dialectical materialism and
historical materialism and use them to observe and analyze the law of
motion in capitalist society and economy can we understand why
capitalism is bound to perish and socialism will triumph. And only when
we use them to observe and analyze the law of motion in socialist
society and economy can we understand the duration and complexity of
class struggle and line struggle in socialist society, and only then can
we understand the general tendency of development from socialism to
communism and why it cannot be averted by human will. This will
strengthen our faith to struggle for the ultimate victory of the
communist enterprise with full determination and without fear of
sacrifice and difficulties.

To study political economy, we must insist on the revolutionary style of
learning, which combines theory with practice. Chairman Mao teaches us:
"We must thoroughly know Marxist theory and be able to apply it. The
purpose of thoroughly knowing it lies in applying it."
<a id="13">[[13]](#bot_13)</a> To combine theory
and practice is a question of revolutionary discipline and a question of
the nature of the Party. We must combine the study of political economy
with the criticism of modern revisionism, with the criticism of the
reactionary fallacies peddled by Liu Shao-ch'i, Lin Piao, and similar
swindlers, with the Three Great Revolutionary Practices of class
struggle, production struggle, and scientific experiment, and with the
transformation of the world outlook. "Marxist philosophy considers that
the most important question is not being able to explain the world
through an understanding of the laws of the objective world, but being
able to use this understanding to transform the world."
<a id="14">[[14]](#bot_14)</a>

Is it difficult to learn Marxist political economy? Yes. In the preface
to the first edition of _Capital_, Marx said: "Everything
starts out difficult. Every science is this way." In the concrete
analysis of objective phenomena, Marxist political economy penetrates
the surface, grasps the essence, and undertakes scientific abstraction.
Thus, when we start, we often come across some terms and concepts which
are difficult to understand. But Marxist political economy was written
for the proletariat and talked about proletarian revolution. If only we
seriously study it, we can understand it gradually. "'There are no
difficult things, only people without sufficient resolve.' If it is not
difficult to start, it is also feasible to do advanced study. All that
is needed is the determination and the ability to
learn."<a id="15">[[15]](#bot_15)</a>

Marx once pointed out: "There is no smooth path in science. Only those
who are not afraid of climbing the steep mountain paths can expect to
reach the summit of brilliance."
<a id="16">[[16]](#bot_16)</a>
Proletarian revolutionary leaders spent their whole lives establishing
and developing Marxist theory. Following their shining examples and
diligently reading works by Marx, Lenin, and Chairman Mao, we should
struggle to study for the mastery of this Marxist theoretical weapon,
for the socialist revolution and the socialist construction enterprise,
and for the worldwide realization of communism.

### Major Study References

Marx, "Introduction to _A Critique of Political Economy_."
Engels, _Anti-Diihring_, Part 2, Chapter 1.

Lenin, _Karl Marx_ ("Marx's Economic Theories"). Chairman
Mao, "On Contradiction," Section 4.

Chairman Mao, "On the Correct Handling of the Contradictions among the
People," Section 1.

### Review Problems

1\. Why is political economy a science of class struggle?

2\. Why do we say that Marxist political economy is an important
theoretical basis for the Party's basic line?

3\. How can one learn political economy well?

Notes
-------------------

<a id="bot_s_a">[\*](#s_a)</a> Hsiieh i-tien cheng-chih ching-chi-hsvieh ---
cheng-chih ching-chi-hsiieh ti tui-hsiang.

<a id="bot_1">[[1]](#1)</a> Engels, "Karl Marx 'A Critique of Political
Economy,'" _Selected Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 2,
Jen-min ch'u-panshe, 1972, p. 123.

<a id="bot_2">[[2]](#2)</a> "On Practice," _Selected Works of Mao
Tse-tung_, Vol. 1, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 259.

<a id="bot_3">[[3]](#3)</a> Marx, _Wage Labor and Capital, Selected Works
of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 1, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p.
362.

<a id="bot_4">[[4]](#4)</a> "On Protracted War," _Selected Works of Mao
Tse-tung_, Vol. 2, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 437.

<a id="bot_5">[[5]](#5)</a> "The Bankruptcy of the Idealist Conception of
History," [Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung], Vol. 4, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 1401.

<a id="bot_6">[[6]](#6)</a> Marx, "Introduction to _A Critique of Political
Economy_," _Selected Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 2,
Jen-min ch'u-panshe, 1972, p. 82.

<a id="bot_7">[[7]](#7)</a> Ibid., p. 83.

<a id="bot_8">[8](#8)</a> Stalin, _Marxism and Linguistics_,
Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1971, p. 4.

<a id="bot_9">[[9]](#9)</a> Marx, _Capital_, Vol. 1,
_Complete Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 23, pp. 831-832.

<a id="bot_10">[[10]](#10)</a> "Karl Marx," _Selected Works of
Lenin_, Vol. 2, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 599.

<a id="bot_11">[[11]](#11)</a> "Constitution of the Chinese Communist
Party," _Collected Documents from the Tenth Chinese Communist Party
Congress_, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1973, p. 44.

<a id="bot_12">[[12]](#12)</a> Marx, "Epilogue to the Second Edition of
_Capital_," _Complete Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 23, p.
24.

<a id="bot_13">[[13]](#13)</a> "The Rectification of the Party's Style of
Work," _Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung_, Vol. 3, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 773.

<a id="bot_14">[[14]](#14)</a> "On Practice," _Selected Works of Mao
Tse-tung_, Vol. 1, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 268.

<a id="bot_15">[[15]](#15)</a> "Strategic Questions in China's
Revolutionary War," _Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung_, Vol.
1, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 165.

<a id="bot_16">[[16]](#16)</a> Marx, "Preface to the French Edition of
_Capital_," _Complete Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 23, p.
26.
