[*4* How the Capitalists Exploit and Oppress the Workers](#) 
=============================================================================================

[Capital and Surplus
Value](#)<a id="s_a">[\*](#bot_s_a)</a>

Capitalist production is commodity production aimed at reaping surplus
value. To understand the nature of capitalist production, we must study
Marx's theory of capital and surplus value. Only by equipping ourselves
with this theory can we understand the exploitative relation of
capitalism, realize the inevitable extinction of capitalism and the
inevitable triumph of socialism, appreciate the historical mission of
the proletariat, and become conscious revolutionary soldiers of the
proletariat.

[The Secret of the Exploitation of the Workers by the Capitalists](#)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _The Conversion of Labor Power into Commodities Is the Precondition for the Production Surplus Value_

Every old worker from the old society has a family history full of
hardship and suffering. In the old society, the workers "ate like pigs
and dogs and toiled like buffaloes and horses." They "worked until they
were old, and their lot was worse than a blade of grass." They were
oppressed politically, and their livelihood was uncertain. But the
capitalists never worked. They bossed the workers around and led
extravagant and degenerate lives. Their wealth increased all
the time. Why? Marx's theory of capital and surplus value revealed this
secret and scientifically answered these questions.

How did Marx's theory of capital and surplus value reveal the secret of
the capitalists' exploitation of the workers? We must start from that
special commodity, labor power.

Labor power means human work, the sum total of a person's physical and
mental effort. In any society, labor power is the chief factor of
production. But only in the capitalist society is labor power a
commodity. There are two conditions under which labor power becomes a
commodity. First, the laborer is a "free man." He is free to sell his
labor power as a commodity. Second, the laborer has nothing aside from
his labor. He has no means of production or means of livelihood and must
sell his labor power to live. These two conditions occurred when the
feudal society collapsed and in the course of polarization between the
small commodity producers and primitive accumulation. The employment of
workers by the capitalist consists of buying their labor power and
converting them into hired slaves.

Once labor power becomes a commodity, it possesses value and use value,
like other commodities. The value of labor power, like the value of all
commodities, is determined by the amount of socially necessary labor
required for its production and reproduction. The capitalist must
maintain the labor capacity of the worker if he wants him to work for
him. To maintain the worker's labor capacity, it is necessary to feed,
clothe, and shelter him and provide him with means of livelihood.
Therefore, the value of labor power must include, first of all, the
value of the means of livelihood needed to maintain his sustenance. At
the same time, workers grow old and die. In order to maintain the
capitalist exploitative system, the capitalist needs new workers as
replacements. Therefore, the value of labor power must also include the
value of means of livelihood needed by the worker to support his
children and other dependents. To more fully exploit the worker, the
capitalist generally requires him to master certain skills through
general education and training. Thus, the value of labor
power must also include the cost of education and training. But this
amounts to very little. In general, it can be said that the socially
necessary labor needed for the production of labor power is the socially
necessary labor needed for the production of the above mentioned means
of livelihood. In other words, the value of labor power is the value of
the means of livelihood needed to keep the worker alive and his
offspring growing.

As for the use value of labor power, it is different from the use value
of other commodities. Labor power is a special commodity. Its use value
possesses a special characteristic. When the use value of other
commodities, like food grains and clothing, is consumed, no new use
value is created. But the use of this special commodity labor power,
that is, the worker's work, can create value and, moreover, can create
value which is higher than the value of the labor power itself. "When
the capitalist purchases labor power, it is this augmented value in
which he is interested."
<a id="1">[[1]](#bot_1)</a> This difference is
called surplus value.

### _The Surplus Value Expropriated by the Capitalist Comes from the Exploitation of Workers_

How then does surplus value arise? Let us examine concretely the
production process of surplus value. After the purchase of labor power
by the capitalist, he forces the worker to work in his factories to
produce commodities. There are two aspects of capitalist production
process. It is a labor process. It is also a value-augmenting process.

A labor process is the purposeful process by which people use certain
labor to transform the labor object for human needs. The characteristic
of the capitalist labor process is that the capitalist possesses means
of production. The worker toils under the capitalist's orders while his
labor products belong to the capitalist. The result of the capitalist
labor process is the production of a certain use value capable of
satisfying certain social needs. But that is not the purpose of
capitalist production. The capitalist allows the worker to
produce certain use value only because use value is the material carrier
of value. If he does not provide some use value, there will be no demand
for his commodity, and the value (including surplus value) produced will
not be realized.

The capitalist production process is also a value-augmenting process.
When the workers produce use value, they are also using their active
labor to create new value. The new value which the workers create is
higher than the value of the labor power itself. This is called
value-augmenting. This value-augmenting is the ultimate goal of the
capitalist. The value-augmenting process is the major theme of the
capitalist production process.

Take the example of cotton yarn production. The capitalist first
purchases enough means of production for a worker's twelve-hour workday.
Suppose the value of these means of production is equal to forty-eight
hours of labor, totaling twenty-four yuan. He also purchases a day's
labor power from a worker. Suppose the value of a day 's labor power is
equal to six hours of labor, totaling three yuan. Then the worker is
made to spin yarn. Since what the capitalist has purchased is a day's
labor power, he will not ask the worker to work for only six hours.
Suppose the worker toils twelve hours a day. Then, the value of the
cotton yarn produced is equal to sixty hours of labor, totaling thirty
yuan, of which twenty-four yuan is transferred from the means of
production and six yuan is the new value created by the worker in twelve
hours' labor. In this labor process, the capitalist gets only
twenty-seven yuan, of which twenty-four yuan are used for purchasing
means of production and three yuan for paying wages. The remainder is
three yuan. This is the augmented value created by the worker and
expropriated by the capitalist. The process of value augmenting is the
production process of surplus value.

What takes place above still follows the principle of equivalence in
exchange. But value is augmented, and surplus value produced. The key of
this process is that the capitalist obtains the right to use the labor
power he has purchased. "The use value of the labor power,
that is, the labor itself, belongs just as little to the vendor as the
use value of oil which has been sold belongs to the oil dealer. The
owner of money has paid the daily value of labor power. Consequently,
its use during the day, the whole day's labor, belongs to him. The daily
sustenance of labor power only costs half a working day, although such
labor power can be in action the entire day. Consequently, the value
which its employment creates in a single day is double its own daily
value." <a id="2">[[2]](#bot_2)</a> That the
capitalist can build larger factories and accumulate ever more wealth is
due to the fact that the value created by labor is far larger than the
value of labor power and the difference is expropriated by the
capitalist.

Through the analysis of the production process of surplus value, we can
see clearly that surplus value is created by workers in the production
sphere. But to conceal the exploitation of workers, the bourgeoisie and
their agents insist that the new value obtained by the capitalist comes
from the circulation sphere. We must thoroughly expose such lies.
Surplus value cannot be explained by saying that the buyer buys
commodities below their values or that the seller sells commodities
above their values, since the gain or loss obtained through the
transaction will be offset by the change in roles between buyers and
sellers. Neither can surplus value be explained by deceit, because even
though deception may increase the welfare of one party at the expense of
another, it cannot increase the total wealth of both parties. "The whole
capitalist class of a country cannot become richer by deceiving
themselves." <a id="3">[[3]](#bot_3)</a> If there
is any relation between surplus value and the circulation sphere, it is
the fact that the capitalist cannot divorce himself from the circulation
sphere in buying labor and selling commodities. In the circulation
sphere, the capitalist buys labor power which provides the condition for
producing surplus value. And the capitalist realizes this surplus value
through selling his commodities. In any case, surplus value can only be
created in the production sphere and not in the circulation sphere.
Surplus value can only be the product of the capitalist's exploitation
of the worker in the production process.

Once we understand the secret of capitalist exploitation, we
can appreciate the nature of capital and the basic economic law under
capitalism. Capital is a value that can bring about surplus value, or it
can be said to be a value with self-value-augmenting power. Capital is
not a simple thing. It expresses the capitalist mode of production,
namely the class relations whereby the capitalist exploits the workers.

This relation expressed by capital is a result of historical
development. Means of production and money existed before the emergence
of the capitalist mode of production. But only under the capitalist mode
of production when capital is owned by the capitalist and is used as a
means to exploit the worker's surplus value does it become capital. Marx
pointed out, "The Negro is simply a negro. Only under some conditions
does he become a slave. A spinning machine is a machine for spinning
cotton. Only under some conditions does it become capital."
<a id="4">[[4]](#bot_4)</a> Bourgeois economists
insisted that the means of production is capital. According to this
reasoning, the stone implements and wood clubs used by primitive man
were capital. The purpose of their fallacies was to conceal the class
relations among people with the relations among things, to conceal the
nature of capitalist exploitation, to negate the fact that capital is a
historical category, and to explain capitalism as eternal and existing
from time immemorial.

Marx pointed out in his analysis of the capitalist mode of production
that "to produce surplus value and to make money is the absolute law of
this mode of production."
<a id="5">[[5]](#bot_5)</a> This law
of surplus value is also the basic economic law of capitalism. It
reveals the objective purpose and nature of capitalism. There would be
no capitalist production without the production of surplus value. All
the activities of the capitalist are aimed at squeezing the sweat and
blood from the worker for profit. The capitalist's greed for money is
never satisfied and his thirst for surplus value is never quenched. This
is the nature of the capitalist. "The purpose of capital is not to
satisfy needs, but to produce profit."
<a id="6">[[6]](#bot_6)</a> "Capital and its
increase in value are the beginning and the end of production and are
the means and the end of production."
<a id="7">[[7]](#bot_7)</a> The whole capitalist
system is based on the cruel exploitation of the worker by the
capitalist. Capitalism is the evil system in which man exploits man.

To maintain the capitalist system and conceal the nature of capitalist
exploitation, the bourgeoisie and their spokesmen fabricated all sorts
of fallacies to deceive the masses. They said that the suffering of the
workers was due to their "bad luck" and that the wealth of the
capitalist was a result of their "diligence and thrift." These are all
lies. The capitalist never works; how can he be "diligent"? He leads an
extravagant and evil life; how can he be "thrifty"? In the old society,
the suffering of the worker was not because of "bad luck," but because
most of the products produced were expropriated by the capitalist. In
short, the poverty of the worker and the wealth of the capitalist arose
from the same source. It was the capitalist exploitative system based on
the capitalist's private ownership.

[The Cruel Means by Which the Capitalists Exploit and Oppress the Workers](#)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _The Rate of Surplus Value Reflects the Degree of Exploitation of the Worker by the Capitalist_

The capitalist is capital in disguise. His soul is the soul of capital.
The capitalist is a bloodsucker. He will not stop if there is still
something left to be squeezed out of the worker. To get more surplus
value, the capitalist tries his best to increase the exploitation of the
worker. We can gauge the degree of the capitalist's exploitation of the
worker by the rate of surplus value.

To understand the rate of surplus value as a gauge of the degree of the
capitalist's exploitation of the worker, we must understand the
different roles played by the means of production and labor power in the
creation of value and in augmenting value and the difference between
constant and variable capital.

Means of production is consumed in the process of production and loses
its original value in use. But its value is not lost. It is
simply transferred to new products through the worker's labor. But this
transfer cannot add any new value. Therefore, the part of capital which
is used to buy means of production is called constant capital. In
contrast to constant capital, the part of capital used by the capitalist
to buy labor power is called variable capital because the new value
created by labor exceeds the value the labor power received. Surplus
value is the product of the augmenting of variable capital.

Let us use "c" to denote constant capital, "v" for variable capital, and
"m "for surplus value. Then, the advance payment for capital, is c + v
and the total value of products is c + v + m. Since the value of c is
unchanged in the production process, m is merely the result of the
augmenting of v. So to indicate the degree of exploitation of the worker
by the capitalist, we can ignore c and contrast only m with v. Then m
/vis the rate of surplus value. Using the above example of spinning, v
is three yuan, and m is also three yuan. The rate of surplus value
reflecting the degree of exploitation by the capitalist is thus m/v,
that is, 100 percent.

From the process of value-augmenting, we can see that the labor time of
a workday can be divided into two parts: one is the value (wage) used to
reproduce variable capital. That part of labor time is needed for the
sustenance of the worker and is called necessary labor time. The other
part is used to produce surplus value for the capitalist and is called
surplus labor. Therefore, the rate of surplus value can also be
expressed as:

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --
  $$\text\frac}} = \frac}\text}$$   
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --

### _To Obtain Absolute Surplus Value through Lengthening Labor Time_

The capitalist always tries to increase the rate of surplus value by
increasing the exploitation of the worker. In order to increase the rate
of surplus value, the capitalist generally resorts to
lengthening labor time. Under capitalism, the labor time of a worker in
a day is the sum of necessary labor and surplus labor time. Under the
condition of constant necessary labor time, the longer the labor time,
the longer the surplus labor time. If, in the beginning, the daily labor
time of a worker is twelve hours, six hours of which are necessary labor
time, then six hours are surplus labor time. Now the capitalist extends
the labor time to fifteen hours. With necessary labor time constant at
six hours, surplus labor time becomes nine hours, three hours more than
before. Thus, the ratio between surplus labor time and necessary labor
time changes from six to six to nine to six. And the rate of surplus
value is increased from 100 percent to 150 percent. This surplus value
produced by the absolute lengthening of the daily labor time is called
absolute surplus value.

In old China, the working time of the worker was incredibly long. The
daily labor time was 15, 16 or even more than 18 hours. It was not
unusual for a worker "to see stars in the sky before he went to bed late
at night and to see stars when he had to get up early the next morning."
Prior to liberation, the workers in San-t'iao-shih, Tientsin, had to
work 357 days a year and about 20 hours a day. Reckoning on the basis of
8 hours a day, it was equivalent to working 893 workdays. One year's
labor was equivalent to nearly 3 years. To lengthen the labor time of
the workers, the capitalists thought up all kinds of restrictions, such
as 10 minutes for meals and registration before going to toilets. They
even resorted to the mean trick of setting the clock back! The longer
the worker's labor time, the longer the surplus labor time and the
longer the absolute surplus value obtained by the capitalist. Under the
cruel exploitation of the capitalist, this constant physical exhaustion
severely strained the worker, often resulting in early death.

Though the lengthening of labor time by the capitalist to increase
exploitation is an easy method, it inevitably leads to opposition from
the worker. At the same time, the capitalist cannot extend the work time
to twenty-four hours a day because there is a physical limit to labor
power expenditure. Thus, the capitalist adopts another, more
obscure method by shortening the necessary labor time and thus
lengthening the relative surplus labor time to increase his exploitation
of the worker.

### _To Extract Relative Surplus Value through Shortening the Necessary Labor Time_

How can the necessary labor time be shortened? We know that the
necessary labor time is the labor time needed for the reproduction of
the value of labor power. And the value of labor power is determined by
the value of necessary means of livelihood for the sustenance of the
worker and his dependents. If the capitalist adopts new techniques and
new machines to increase general labor productivity and thus reduce the
value of means of livelihood necessary for the reproduction of labor
power, then, even if the total daily labor time of the worker is
constant, the relative surplus labor time can be lengthened because the
necessary labor time can now be shortened because the value of labor
power is reduced. Suppose the original necessary labor time is six hours
and the surplus labor time is also six hours. Now, if the general labor
productivity has been doubled, the value of the means of livelihood
necessary for the worker and his dependents will be reduced by half, and
the labor time necessary for reproducing the labor power value will also
be shortened from six to three hours. And the surplus labor time will be
lengthened from six to nine hours, three hours more than before. The
ratio of surplus labor time to necessary labor time changes from six to
six to nine to three. The rate of surplus value increases from 100
percent to 300 percent. This surplus value created by the shortening of
the necessary labor time and the relative lengthening of the surplus
labor time is called relative surplus value.

It must also be pointed out that the efforts of the individual
capitalist to adopt new techniques and new machines to force the worker
to increase his labor productivity cannot reduce the value of means of
livelihood. Therefore, he cannot immediately fulfill his aim of
extracting relative surplus value. If this is the case, why
does the capitalist adopt new techniques and new machines? The direct
motive of the capitalist for adopting new techniques and new machines is
to reduce the individual labor time for commodity production below the
socially necessary labor time, so that when he sells his commodities at
values determined by the socially necessary labor time he can get more
surplus value than other capitalists. The surplus value resulting from
lower individual labor time of commodities than the socially necessary
labor time is called excess surplus labor. But the capitalist who first
adopts new techniques is not likely to enjoy this excess surplus value
for long because of similar actions by other capitalists to share part
of the excess profit. When the new techniques and new machines have been
widely adopted and the general labor productivity elevated, the value of
commodities will come down. The gap between individual labor time and
socially necessary labor time leading to excess surplus value will
disappear. Excess surplus value will also disappear. However, as a
result, general labor productivity will have been elevated. The values
of many commodities will come down, and the means of livelihood
constituting the value of labor will be cheaper. The value of labor
power will be cheaper, and the necessary labor time will be shortened.
Consequently, the capitalist can extract more relative surplus labor.

The greedy capitalist not only resorts to elevating labor productivity
to increase his relative surplus value, he also resorts to shortening
the necessary labor time by increasing labor intensity to extract more
relative surplus value. Marx said: "In a sense, the elevation of labor
productivity and the increase of labor intensity serve the same
function. They will increase the total production derived from a given
period of time. Consequently, they will shorten the part of the workday
needed for the production of the workers' own means of livelihood or
other equivalents."
<a id="8">[[8]](#bot_8)</a> The
capitalist quickens the operation of machines, raises the labor quota,
and reduces total employment but not total workload to increase the
labor intensity of the worker. The labor of the worker is ever more
demanding. After one day's work, he is completely exhausted. Take the
example of the Shanghai Shen-hsin Yarn Mill. In 1933, 440 workers were
employed for every 100,000 spindles. In order to compete with the
Japanese-operated yarn mills and to get more surplus value, the
capitalists of this mill forced up labor intensity by reducing the
number of workers. In 1934, only 270 workers were employed for 100,000
spindles. In the old society under the oppression of the capitalist, the
workers were so overworked that many became senile at age forty.

### _Depress Wages below the Value of Labor to Extract More Surplus Value_

The tricks adopted by the capitalist to exploit the worker are numerous.
He often depresses and deducts wages. When we analyzed absolute surplus
value earlier, we assumed that the capitalist pays wages according to
the value of labor power. But the wages of the worker are often below
the value of his labor power. The capitalist tries his best to depress
the worke r's wages. Even though the worker's wages may barely be enough
for his sustenance, he still tries to make all sorts of reductions to
depress wages below the value of labor power so that even a minimum
level of subsistence cannot be maintained by the worker. For example,
there was a regulation in K'ai-luan Coal Mine: forty-seven cents daily
for the mule as fodder, but not more than twenty-two cents daily for the
miner in wages. "Men were inferior to mules." Also, in old China, many
plants had penal codes for the workers, with all sorts of fancy items.
Sometimes, the fine was even higher than the wage. For example, emptying
water indiscriminately was punishable; looking out of the window was
also punishable; assembling and associating were even more punishable.
All the fines finally ended up in the capitalist's pockets as an
additional source of income.

The capitalist employed a large number of women and child laborers to
engage in more cruel exploitation. With the employment of a large number
of women and child laborers, the worke r's wages were often reduced to
below the value of labor power. The wages of women and child
laborers were even lower. In old China, women worked for more than ten
hours daily, just like men, but their wages were only two-thirds or half
that of men. The wages for child laborers were even lower, often only
half that of women. Some capitalists merely provided some cheap meals
with no money wage. The capitalist treated the "young apprentices" and
the "child laborers" as less than human. Marx pointed out that the
capitalist "extracts silk out of the blood of children who are so young
that they have to be helped to their workshop."
<a id="9">[[9]](#bot_9)</a> Children in the
growing stage and at school age were underfed, underclothed, and
tortured by the capitalist. They were often beaten up and cursed. A
large number of child laborers perished under the cruel exploitation of
the capitalist.

In capitalist society, the capitalist not only cruelly exploited the
worker, he also ruthlessly oppressed him. In old China, many capitalists
stipulated plant regulations to oppress the worker. The tens or even a
hundred penalty code items stripped much of the worker's freedom.
Examples were "searching before and after work" and "the management has
the right to fire workers." The plants were like prisons, and the
workers were like prisoners. Some capitalists even had military and
police forces stationed in the plant to oppress the workers.

Capitalism brought untold suffering to the worker. It is an evil,
exploitative system. But renegade Liu Shao-ch'i tried his best to defend
the capitalist exploitative system and advocated that "exploitation has
its merits." He even said, "Capitalist exploitation is not only not
evil, it has its merits." This is all nonsense! Marx's theory of surplus
value is the most eloquent criticism of that so-called "exploitation has
its merits." Liu Shao-ch'i and company's vain attempt to restore the
capitalist exploitative system in socialist China could only expose
their evil countenance as the spokesmen of the bourgeoisie.

[Wages Conceal the Exploitative Relation of Capitalism](#)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _Wages Are a Disguised Form of the Value or Price of Labor_

In capitalist society, the worker toiled in the capitalist's plant and
earned wages from the capitalist. The worker received a day's wages
after he toiled for a day. He received a week's wages after he toiled
for a week. On the surface, it looked as if all his labor had been
compensated and that it was an "equivalent exchange." In fact, the form
of wages concealed the exploitation of the worker by the capitalist.

Marx pointed out: "Wages are not what they appear to be. They are not
the value or price of labor, but a disguised form of the value or price
of labor power." <a id="10">[[10]](#bot_10)</a>
The wages advocated by the capitalist as "the value or price of labor"
are entirely fictitious.

The key lies in the distinction between labor power and labor. This
"involves an extremely important question in political economy."
<a id="11">[[11]](#bot_11)</a> Under the
capitalist system, what is being sold and bought as a commodity is labor
power, not labor.

Why is labor not a commodity and why can it not be bought or sold? This
is because, first, if labor is a commodity, it should exist before it is
sold, just like other commodities. But, in fact, labor is the exercise
of labor power. It does not exist before it is sold. It exists only
after it is sold and used in the labor process. Also, once the worker's
labor is hired out, it no longer belongs to the worker himself. His
labor belongs to the capitalist. Second, if labor is a commodity,
according to the requirements of the law of value, it must be exchanged
for equivalent value. Then the capitalist should pay the worker the full
value created by the worker as his wage and as payment for the worker's
labor. If this were the case, then the capitalist would lose his source
of wealth and surplus value would be abolished. There would no longer be
capitalism. Third, if labor is a commodity, it should have a value. How
should this value be determined? We know that the value of
all commodities is determined by the amount of embodied labor. If the
value of labor is also determined by the amount of labor, the result is
to evaluate labor with labor. This is a tautology.

From this we can see that labor is not a commodity. It has no value.
There is no such thing as "the value or price of labor."

Under capitalism, the capitalist purchases labor power from the worker,
but not labor. The wage paid to the worker by the capitalist is
equivalent only to the value of the labor power. The remainder of what
the worker's labor creates over and above the value of the labor power
is surplus value which is exploited by the capitalist. Therefore, the
capitalist wage reflects the relation between the hiring capitalist and
the hired worker, between the exploiting capitalist and the exploited
worker.

### _The Downward Trend of the Real Wage of the Worker_

The capitalist usually pays wages in money form. When the worker sells
his labor power, he obtains a certain amount of money. The wage
expressed in money form is called the nominal wage. The amount of money
cannot reflect the actual standard of living of the worker. The real
standard of living can only be reflected by the amount of means of
livelihood purchasable by the money wage. This wage that reflects the
real standard of living of the worker is called the real wage.

The nominal wage and the real wage are not always the same. With the
nominal wage held constant, the real wage can decline. When the
purchasing power of money declines and the prices of the means of
livelihood go up, the same amount of the nominal wage can only be
exchanged for a smaller amount of means of livelihood. Then the real
wage falls. Sometimes even if the nominal wage goes up a bit, but less
than the increase in prices of the means of livelihood, the real wage
will still decline.

In capitalist society, there is a downward trend in the real
wage of the worker. The bourgeoisie always use inflation,
price increases, and rent hikes to increase the gap between the nominal
and the real wage and to exploit the worker.

In old China, "wages increased at a snail's pace while prices went up
like a balloon." To maintain their reactionary rule and plunder the
people, the Chiang \[Kai-shek\] dynasty quickened the operation of the
money printing press. In the twelve years between 1937 and 1949, the
issue of notes increasedby 140,000 million times and the price index
increased by 8,500,000 million times. The worker in old China had more
than his share of suffering from inflation. On the eve of the collapse
of the Chiang dynasty, on every payday "the price of rice jumped three
times while one trudged across the street." In old China, the worker not
only was paid a low wage, but what he could buy with it was even less.
The wage was not worth a damn. It was almost impossible to support a
family. Sometimes after strikes the nominal wage might go up a little,
but prices went up a lot more. The lot of the worker was getting worse
every day. What was even worse, the rents were very high. Even a
run-down thatched shed cost a fortune. Marx and Engels pointed out,
"After the exploitation by the plant owner, another group of bourgeoisie
--- landlords, proprietors, and pawn shop owners --- were waiting to
take turns getting their shares from the worker's wages."
<a id="12">[[12]](#bot_12)</a>

### _The Working Class Struggles against Capitalist Exploitation_

The decline in the real wage reduced the majority of workers to cold and
starvation. The working class naturally rose to oppose capitalist
exploitation.

The economic struggle which the working class undertook to increase
wages in order to protect their right to survive and to oppose the cruel
exploitation of the bourgeoisie was very significant. This was because
it not only delayed the decline of real wages, but it was also able to
strengthen the unity of the working class, elevate their class
consciousness, and temper their combat spirit. But we must not
exaggerate the significance of economic struggle. Marx
pointed out that the working class "should not forget: in this daily
struggle they are only opposing the effect, but not the cause that
produces this effect; they are only delaying the downward trend, not
changing the direction of the trend; they are only suppressing the
symptom, not curing the disease."
<a id="13">[[13]](#bot_13)</a> Therefore, if the
working class wants an ultimate solution, it cannot limit itself to
economic struggles but must also extend from economic struggles to
political struggles, overthrow the reactionary rule of the bourgeoisie,
and demolish the capitalist exploitative system.

However, all sorts of scabs advocated: It is only necessary to engage in
economic struggles. According to their fallacies, there is no need for
the working class to seize political power through violent revolution
and demolish the capitalist system. It should be contented with a little
wage increase and some improvement in working conditions. These
fallacies peddled by a handful of scabs were intended to vainly lead the
proletarian revolutionary movement to the stray path of bourgeois
reformism. They wanted the working class to serve as the capitalists'
hired slaves forever. "Workers should not abide by the conservative
motto 'a fair day's wage for a fair day's labor! 'They should write on
their banner the revolutionary slogan: 'Do away with the system of hired
labor!'"<a id="14">[[14]](#bot_14)</a>

### _Major Study References_

Marx, _Capital_, Vol. 1, Chapters 4, 5, 10, 17.

Marx, _Wage Labor and Capital_.

Marx, _Wage, Prices and Profit_.

Chairman Mao, "The Analysis of Chinese Social Classes."

Chairman, Mao, "The Chinese Revolution and the Chinese Communist Party,"
Chapter 1, Section 3; Chapter 2, Section 4.

### _Review Problems_

1\. How does surplus value arise? Why do we say that the
production of surplus value is the nature of capitalist
production?

2\. What methods does the capitalist use to exploit and oppress the
worker?

3\. Why do we say that the capitalist wage is merely a disguised form of
the value or price of labor power?

4\. Why do we have to learn Marx's theory of surplus value? How do we use
Marx's theory of surplus value to criticize Liu Shao-ch'i and company's
viewpoint that "exploitation has its merit"?

_Notes_
-------------------

<a id="bot_s_a">[\*](#s_a) Tzu-pen-chia shih tsen-yang po-hsiao ho ya-p'o
kung-jen ti --- tzu-pen ho sheng-yii chia-chih.

<a id="bot_1">[[1]](#1)</a> Marx, _Capital_, Vol. 1, _Complete
Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 23, p. 219.

<a id="bot_2">[[2]](#2)</a> Ibid.

<a id="bot_3">[[3]](#3)</a> Ibid., pp. 185-186.

<a id="bot_4">[[4]](#4)</a> Marx, _Wage Labor and Capital_,
_Selected Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 1, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 362.

<a id="bot_5">[[5]](#5)</a> Marx, _Capital_, Vol. 1, _Complete
Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 23, p. 679.

<a id="bot_6">[[6]](#6)</a> Marx, _Capital_, Vol. 
3, Jen-minch'u-pan-she, 1966, p.280.

<a id="bot_7">[[7]](#7)</a> Ibid., p. 272.

<a id="bot_8">[[8]](#8)</a> Marx, [Capital], Vol. 1, _Complete
Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 23, p. 578.

<a id="bot_9">[[9]](#9)</a> Ibid., p. 325.

<a id="bot_10">[[10]](#10)</a> Marx, _Critique of the Gotha
Program_, _Selected Works of Marx and Engels_,
Vol. 3, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 17.

<a id="bot_11">[[11]](#11)</a> Engels, "Introduction to _Wage Labor and
Capital_," _Selected Works of Marx and Engels_,
Vol. 1, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 341.

<a id="bot_12">[[12]](#12)</a> _Communist Manifesto_, _Selected
Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 1, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she,
1972, pp. 258-259.

<a id="bot_13">[[13]](#13)</a> Marx, _Wage, Prices and Profit_,
_Selected Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 2, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 203.

<a id="bot_14">[[14]](#14)</a> Ibid., pp. 203-204.
