[*5* The Widening Gap between the Rich and the Poor in Capitalist Society](#) 
==============================================================================================================

[Capital Accumulation and the Impoverishment of the Working
Class](#)<a id="s_a">[\*](#bot_s_a)</a>

The capitalist tries his best to extract absolute and relative surplus
value and to convert it into capital for the exploitation and oppression
of the worker on a larger scale. This process of converting surplus
value into capital is called capital accumulation. The analysis of
capital accumulation makes us realize why in the old society the
capitalist who never labored was getting richer and the toiling worker's
lot was getting worse. It helps us further understand why the
expropriation of the expropriator, the extinction of capitalism, and the
inevitable triumph of socialism cannot be reversed by any reactionary
forces and why the overthrow of the evil capitalist system is the great
historical mission of the proletariat.

[Capital Accumulation Increases the Exploitation of the Workers](#)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _Analyze Capitalist Simple Reproduction and Expose the Lie That the Capitalist Supports the Worker_

We said earlier that the conversion of surplus value expropriated by the
capitalist into capital is capital accumulation. Before we analyze
capital accumulation, let us see what would happen if the
capitalist spent the expropriated surplus value all on himself instead
of converting it to capital. Under this condition, the production of the
capitalist could not be expanded. He could only carry on capitalist
simple reproduction.

Suppose a capitalist started a plant with 10,000 yuan, of which 8.000
yuan was used to buy the plant building, raw materials, and machine
equipment (to simplify the example, suppose this 8.000 yuan of means of
production was totally expended in the year with its value transferred
to the products) and 2,000 yuan was used to purchase labor power.
Further, suppose the rate of surplus value was 100 percent. Then the
value of annual products would be equal to 8,000c + 2,000v + 2,000m =
12,000 yuan, of which, 2,000 yuan would be surplus value. If the
capitalist spent this 2,000 yuan of surplus value on luxury consumption
for himself and his family dependents, the capital in the capitalist's
hands at the beginning of the second year would still be 8,000c + 2,000v
= 10,000 yuan. If there were no change in the surplus value, the value
of the second year's products would still be 8,000c + 2,000v + 2,000m =
12,000 yuan. In the course of reproduction, the scale of operation would
not have expanded, staying at the original level. This reproduction
based on the original scale is called simple reproduction.

What does capitalist simple reproduction explain?

First, we can clearly see who supports whom in the capitalist society.
If we look at it from one single production process, it looks as if the
capitalist supports the worker by advancing his capital as wages. This
is how the capitalist puts it. But, if we look at it from the
reproduction process, the capitalist's lie is easily exposed. Wages are
only part of the value created by the worker himself in the production
process. In the value newly created by the worker is included not only
the value for the support of the worker himself and the reproduction of
labor power, but also the surplus value for the support of the
capitalist and for his extravagant living. Therefore, it is not the
capitalist who supports the worker. On the contrary, it is the worker
who supports the capitalist.

Second, from the process of simple reproduction, we can see
that the capital of the capitalist is converted from surplus
value. Using our earlier example, this capitalist who started out with
10,000 yuan spent 2,000 yuan on his personal consumption. Thus, after
five years, his initial capital would have been completely spent. But,
through simple reproduction, after five years he still had 10,000 yuan
as capital. This 10,000 yuan was no longer the capital he started out
with, but the sum total of his continual extraction of surplus value in
five years. Marx said, 'Ignoring all accumulation, the simple
continuation of the production process or simple reproduction would,
after a longer or shorter period of time, transform any capital into
accumulated capital or capitalized surplus value."
<a id="1">[[1]](#bot_1)</a>

Since the capital of the capitalist is converted from surplus value
created by the worker, it is entirely reasonable that all means of
production expropriated from the capitalist should belong to the
proletarian state if the working class has seized political power. This
is merely taking back the wealth created by the labor of the ancestors
of the working class.

Finally, from the process of simple reproduction, we can also see that
capitalist reproduction not only reproduces various commodities, but
also reproduces the capitalist production relations. In the process of
reproduction, the worker continuously produces the variable capital used
for the purchase of labor power. When the production process ends, the
worker is still an empty-handed hired laborer, and the capitalist still
possesses all the means for the exploitation of the worker.

### _The Capitalist Expands Reproduction for the Sake of Extracting More Surplus Value_

We assumed above that the capitalist spent all the surplus value on his
personal consumption. Because of this, reproduction could only be
carried on at the original scale. But, simple reproduction is not the
characteristic of capitalist production.

The characteristic of capitalist production is expanded reproduction.

To carry on expanded reproduction, the capitalist cannot
spend all the expropriated surplus value on personal
consumption. He must spare part of it for conversion into capital to buy
new machines and equipment and to hire additional workers before he can
expand the scale of operation and realize expanded reproduction.

Suppose the capitalist started out with 10,000 yuan, of which 8.000 yuan
was constant capital and 2,000 yuan was variable capital, and that the
rate of surplus value was 100 percent. When the production process was
completed, the value of products would be 8,000c + 2,000v + 2,000m =
12,000 yuan. Further, suppose that the capitalist used half of the 2,000
yuan of surplus value for personal consumption and the other half for
accumulation to be converted into capital. If the proportion between
constant capital and variable capital were kept constant, then from this
1,000 yuan of new capital, 800 yuan would go into constant capital, and
200 yuan into variable capital. In the second year, the total amount of
capital would be increased to 11.000 yuan. Its composition would be
8,800c + 2,200v + 2,200m = 13,200 yuan. Compared with the value of the
first year's products of 12,000 yuan, this capitalist realized expanded
reproduction.

From capitalist expanded reproduction, we can see that expanded
production can be carried out only because part of the surplus value has
been converted into capital. If, under the condition of simple
reproduction, the capital invested by the capitalist can be seen as
converted from surplus value only after a period of time, then under the
condition of expanded reproduction, the added capital can be seen as
converted from surplus value right from the beginning.

Why does the capitalist not spend all of the surplus value on his
personal consumption but instead carry out capital accumulation for
expanded reproduction? Some bourgeois economists explained capital
accumulation as the virtue of "abstinence" on the part of the
capitalist, as if capital accumulation by the capitalist were for the
good of society as a whole and involved a restraint of his consumption
desire.

Marx exposed the nature of "abstinence." Marx pointed out
that the capitalist possessed "an absolute desire to get
rich." <a id="2">[[2]](#bot_2)</a> The greed of
the capitalist for surplus value is limitless. Surplus value can be
increased continuously only if the capitalist continuously accumulates
capital, increases the amount of capital, and expands the scale of
production. At the same time, capitalist competition also forces him to
accumulate capital. Whoever has more capital is in an advantageous
position with respect to the addition of equipment, the purchase of raw
materials, and the adoption of new techniques. He is also more likely to
increase labor productivity and to depress the individual labor time of
a commodity below the socially necessary labor time, so as to triumph in
the competition. If the reverse were the case, he would fail in the
competition and be swallowed up by the bigger capitalist. Competition
becomes a source of pressure on every capitalist. The fear of failure
and bankruptcy in competition forces the capitalist to engage in capital
accumulation to strengthen his competitive power. "Competition
transforms the internal law of capitalist production into a coercive
external law governing every capitalist. Competition forces the
capitalist to maintain his capital by expanding it continuously. And he
expands his capital by progressive accumulation."
<a id="3">[[3]](#bot_3)</a>

It can be seen that it is not "abstinence" but greed and fear which
motivate the capitalist to convert part of the surplus value extracted
from the worker into capital. The more the capitalist exploits, the
larger the accumulated capital. The larger the accumulated capital, the
more surplus value can be exploited. Therefore, capital accumulation is
not only a result of the exploitation of the worker, but also a means by
which the capitalist extends and expands his exploitation of the worker.

[The Unemployment of Workers Is the Inevitable Result of Capital Accumulation](#)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _The Increase in the Organic Composition of Capital Leads to the Expulsion of the Worker by Machines_

The process of capital accumulation is not only a process of
increasing the total amount of capital. In this process,
there is also the change in the composition of capital and the
consequent adverse effect on the proletariat.

From the material side, the composition of capital is expressed as the
proportion between means of production (plant, machines, equipment, raw
materials) and labor power. There is a definite relation between the
amount of means of production purchased and the number of workers
employed. For example, there is a definite number of spindles a worker
can manage using a certain amount of cotton each day. The level of this
proportion depends on the technological level of production in society,
the characteristics of various production spheres, and the degree of
mechanization. It also depends on the technical equipment of various
enterprises. Therefore, we can call this proportion the technical
composition of capital.

The composition of capital can also be viewed from the value viewpoint.
The value of means of production is expressed as constant capital, and
the value of labor power is expressed as variable capital. The
proportion between constant and variable capital is called the value
composition of capital.

There is a close relation between the technical and value composition of
capital. In general, the value composition of capital varies with the
technical composition of capital. 'The value composition of capital,
which is determined by the technical composition of capital and which
reflects its change, is called the organic composition of capital."
<a id="4">[[4]](#bot_4)</a> The formula for the
organic composition of capital is c: v. For example, suppose a
capitalist has 10,000 yuan, of which 8,000 yuan is constant capital and
2,000 yuan is variable capital. Then the organic composition of capital
is 8,000c: 2,000v, that is, 4:1.

In the course of the development of capitalism, the organic composition
of capital is not constant. To extract more surplus value and to gain an
upper hand in competition, the capitalist must improve the technical
equipment of the enterprise by substituting machines for hand labor or
new machines for old machines. Thus, the capitalist must increase his
capital in machine equipment. The substitution of machines for labor
enables the worker to produce even more products in a given
period of time with an even higher consumption of raw materials. The
capitalist must also increase his capital for the purchase of more raw
materials. Thus, with the continual accumulation of capital, the
proportion of constant capital in the total capital constantly
increases. On the other hand, the proportion of variable capital gets
smaller all the time, leading to an increase in the organic composition
of capital.

In general, the precondition for the increase in the organic composition
of capital is the increase in individual capital. Capital can be
increased in two forms: one is by capital accumulation, that is, an
increase in the total amount of capital by the accumulation of
individual capital; the other is by capital concentration, that is, the
absorption of small capital by big capital through competition or the
merger of several companies into a joint-stock corporation so that
capital that was once scattered is concentrated into larger capital.
Capital accumulation and capital concentration inevitably increase the
organic composition of capital.

The increase in organic composition of capital has serious repercussions
for the working class. If the organic composition of capital is
constant, the accumulation of capital will increase the corresponding
demand for labor power. That is, it will correspondingly increase the
employment opportunities of the worker. But after the organic
composition of capital is increased, the result of capital accumulation
is no longer the same. It can increase the total demand for labor power.
But this increase will be much smaller than the increase in constant
capital. Under certain conditions, the total demand for labor power may
even be lower than before. This is because the demand for labor power
does not depend on the size of total capital but on the size of variable
capital. For example, when the organic composition of capital is 4:1, it
means that for every 100 yuan of total capital, 20 yuan can be used for
hiring workers. But when the organic composition of capital is increased
to 9:1, it means that for every 100 yuan, only 10 yuan is available for
hiring workers. Thus, even if the total capital increases
from 10,000 yuan to 15,000 yuan, the amount of variable capital
decreases from 2,000 yuan to 1,500 yuan. This demonstrates that the
increase in the organic composition of capital reduces employment
opportunities for the worker. In the capitalist society, the working
class creates machines. But when the machines are used by the
capitalist, a large number of workers are displaced and unemployed. The
adoption of sewing machines by the capitalist led to the unemployment of
many sewing workers. The adoption of packing machines led to the
unemployment of many packing workers. The adoption of typesetting
machines led to the unemployment of many typesetting workers. In the
development process of capitalism, with the improvement in techniques
and the increase in the organic composition of capital, employment
opportunities for the laborers are correspondingly reduced and
unemployment increases. This is called the expulsion of workers by
machines.

### _Relative Surplus Population Is the Inevitable Outcome of Capital Accumulation_

The increase in the organic composition of capital relatively reduces
the demand for labor power. But in the course of capital accumulation,
the supply of labor power increases absolutely. With the development of
capitalist production techniques and the widespread adoption of
machines, many labor operations were so simplified that many women and
children could join the ranks of hired labor. At the same time, in the
course of capital accumulation, a large number of small commodity
producers and small capitalists went bankrupt and had to sell their
labor power to support themselves. The development of capitalism in the
countryside also brought bankruptcy to a large number of peasants who
flocked to the city to earn their living. All these factors contributed
to an absolute increase in the supply of labor power.

Thus, on the one hand, the demand for labor power was reduced
relatively. On the other hand, the supply of labor power increased
absolutely. In the end, there always exists in the
capitalist society a large body of unemployed, resulting in
a relative surplus in population.

The so-called relative surplus population is "surplus" only in relation
to the capital demand for it. It does not imply that the population is
in absolute surplus such that it can no longer be supported by the means
of livelihood produced by society. In fact, there is no such thing as an
absolute population surplus because a person not only has a mouth that
can consume food grain, but also two hands that can create certain
material wealth. Once the laboring masses control their own destiny,
they can advance toward the depth and width of production to create ever
more means of livelihood for a more diversified life. Only in the
capitalist society, where the laborers cannot control their own destiny
and the machines created by them are used as capital, are the workers
displaced as relative surplus population. Therefore, Marx called the
relative surplus population an outcome of "a special law of population
under the capitalist mode of production." He pointed out, "Surplus
worker population is an inevitable outcome of accumulation or the
development of wealth on the capitalist basis."
<a id="5">[[5]](#bot_5)</a>

There are three basic forms of surplus population in the capitalist
society:

First, mobile surplus population. This refers to the unemployed
population which has been temporarily displaced in the production
process. This kind of unemployment is most common in industrial centers.
In time of crises and after new machines and new techniques are adopted,
some workers will be displaced. But in time of recovery and when
industry further develops, many of these unemployed workers will be
absorbed back into factories. Very few workers in capitalist countries
can escape from unemployment at one time or another. Most people are
employed off and on.

Second, disguised surplus population, that is, surplus population in the
countryside. After agricultural production has become capitalist and
with the increase in the organic composition of capital, the demand for
agricultural workers decreases steadily. Moreover, in agriculture this
displacement of labor power is absolute. Unless new land is
reclaimed, no additional labor power can be absorbed. Some of the
laborers displaced by capitalist agriculture drift to the city. Others
still cling to a small piece of land and barely support themselves by
intensive cultivation and doing odd jobs. They may not be unemployed in
form, but they are actually surplus in agricultural production. This is
called disguised surplus population.

Third, static surplus population. These people perform household chores
and do odd jobs. Though still belonging to the current labor force,
their jobs are not stable. Their jobs often involve long hours and low
wages. Their standard of living is depressed below the average level for
the working class.

In the capitalist society, in addition to the above three kinds of
surplus population, there is a large number of very poor people who
depend on welfare and begging for their livelihood. Among them are the
aged, the weak, the handicapped, the orphaned, and vagabonds who have
lost their labor capacity. They constitute the lowest stratum of the
relative surplus population, and their lot is the worst.

Relative surplus population is an inevitable outcome of capital
accumulation. At the same time, these people become the lever of capital
accumulation, or even a condition for the existence and development of
the capitalist mode of production. The capitalist uses the existence of
the unemployed workers as a trump card to increase oppression and
exploitation of the currently employed. From the mouth of the
capitalist, one can often hear such vicious words as, 'It is more
difficult to find a hundred dogs than to find a hundred workers." Why is
the capitalist so ferocious? Because outside the door of the plant there
are thousands and thousands of unemployed workers. They are used by the
capitalist to threaten the workers inside the plant and to depress their
wages. At the same time, capitalism develops amidst competition and
chaos and is characterized by sudden contractions and expansions. When
production suddenly expands, the capitalist's demand for labor cannot be
met by the natural increase of labor power. The capitalist requires a
labor power "reservoir." Relative surplus population provides
such a "reservoir." In this sense, we call the huge army of
unemployed in capitalist society an industrial reserve army. It is
required by the existence and development of the capitalist mode of
production.

### _Malthus's "An Essay on the Principle of Population" Is a Reactionary Fallacy in Defense of Capitalism_

In the capitalist society, the widespread existence of a huge army of
unemployed is a "good" thing for the capitalist because it is conducive
to exploitation. But it is also a shameful thing because it makes the
so-called civilized country look very uncivilized. To remedy this
situation, some intellectuals in the service of the bourgeoisie racked
their brains to produce biased theories for the defense of the
capitalist system. In the early nineteenth century, the reactionary _An
Essay on the Principle of Population_ cooked up by a vulgar
English economist named Malthus was one such biased theory.

Malthus advanced a notorious argument. He said that population increases
by the geometric progression (1, 2, 4, 8...), while the means of
livelihood increases by the arithmetic progression (1, 2, 3, 4 ...). He
argued that this is the basic reason for surplus population,
unemployment, and poverty among the masses. This contention was intended
to explain that unemployment and poverty are not the evils of the
capitalist system, but a result of the law of Nature. According to
Malthus's theory, wars and plagues are a blessing to human society. In
wars and plagues, a large number of people die, thus ameliorating the
effects of surplus population and rendering the increase in population
more compatible with the increase in the means of livelihood.

Facts are stronger than arguments. Malthus's reactionary _An Essay on
the Principle of Population_ does not hold water. How did
the pseudoscience that purported to show the geometric increase of
population and the arithmetical increase of the means of livelihood come
into being? What really happened was that Malthus took the increase in
population in America in one period as the basis for his
rate of population increase. He also took the increase in food
production for one period in France as the basis for his rate of
increase in the means of livelihood. The rapid increase in the American
population at that time was not mainly due to the natural multiplication
of population, but to other factors such as immigration. As to the food
production of France, if it was compared with the increase of population
in France and not with the increase of population in America, then it
did not lag behind the increase in population, but exceeded the increase
in population. In 1760, the population of France was 2.1 million. The
average output of food grain per capita was 450 liters. Eighty years
later in 1840, the population of France increased to 3.4 million, an
increase of 62 percent. But the increase in food production was even
faster. In 1840, the average output of food grain per capita was 832
liters, an increase of 85 percent. The data of many other capitalist
countries also showed that the increase in population did not exceed the
increase in the means of livelihood. On the contrary, the increase in
the means of livelihood exceeded the increase in population. But, even
so, the laboring people were very poor, and their lot miserable.
Malthus's defense of the evils of the capitalist system by means of the
so-called absolute surplus population was a futile effort.

The pernicious influence of Malthus's _An Essay on the Principle of
Population_ was widespread in the old China. Imperialists
and Kuomintang reactionaries all along used Malthus's _An Essay on the
Principle of Population_ as a tool to oppose the Chinese
people's revolution. Prior to the liberation, they uttered nonsense like
the Chinese people were poor because there were too many of them, and
they attempted to blame Nature for the evils of imperialism, feudalism,
and bureaucratic capitalism. On the eve of the national liberation, they
again talked nonsense, complaining that China had too many people.
According to them, the people 's government could not solve the food
problem and would not last more than a few months. Chairman Mao sternly
refuted this reactionary fallacy. He said, "The large population of
China is a good thing. We know how to handle an even larger
population. The solution is in production." "Revolution plus
production can solve the food problem."
<a id="6">[[6]](#bot_6)</a> The experience of
socialist China since its establishment has completely vindicated
Chairman Mao's scientific judgment. Under the guidance of Chairman Mao's
revolutionary line, unemployment has been eliminated in China. The
socialist economy flourishes, and the people's standard of living
steadily increases. A poor and backward China has established a
socialist country on its way to prosperity and growth. The imperialist
fallacies went thoroughly bankrupt.

[Capital Accumulation Leads to the Impoverishment of the Proletariat](#)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _The Polarization between the Rich and the Poor Is a General Law of Capitalist Accumulation_

Capital accumulation has entirely different consequences for the
bourgeoisie and the proletariat. To the bourgeoisie, the process of
capital accumulation is the process of capital addition and
concentration and a process of the bourgeoisie's wealth expansion. To
the proletariat, the process of capital accumulation is a process
whereby "machines displace workers," and a process whereby the ranks of
the unemployed are swollen, the employed workers are subject to
increasing exploitation, and the living conditions of the whole working
class worsen steadily. The polarization between the rich and the poor in
capitalist society during capital accumulation will not shift according
to human will. On one end of society is wealth accumulation; on the
other is poverty accumulation. Marx pointed out, "This is an absolute
and general law of capitalist accumulation."
<a id="7">[[7]](#bot_7)</a>

The revelation of this law by Marx is very significant. It tells us that
the working and living conditions of the proletariat are determined by
the capitalist production relations. Under the capitalist system, the
development of production will only lead to the impoverishment of the
proletariat. This impoverishment is not only relative but also absolute.

### _The Steadily Declining Share of the Proletariat in the National Income Leads to Relative Impoverishment_

National income is the sum total of the newly created value of the whole
society in one year. In capitalist society, national income is first
divided into the part that goes to the workers' wages and the part that
is plundered by the capitalists as surplus value. In the development of
capitalism, what will happen to the income shares that go to the workers
and to the capitalists respectively?

National income is wholly created by the laborers and increases steadily
in the process of expanded reproduction. Under capitalism, the share of
wages received by the proletariat steadily declines, and the share of
surplus value received by the bourgeoisie steadily increases. This
phenomenon is called the relative impoverishment of the proletariat.
According to figures published by the United States government, the
share of wages of American workers in the national income was 45.6
percent in 1843, 43.5 percent in 1866, 42.7 percent in 1891, 37 percent
in 1938, 33.3 percent in 1945, and 29.7 percent in 1956. From these
figures, we can see that with capital accumulation, the income of the
workers declined steadily in relative term s, while the wealth
expropriated by the bourgeoisie increased steadily.

### _The Steady Deterioration of Labor Conditions and Living Conditions Leads to the Absolute Impoverishment of the Proletariat_

In capitalist society, there exists not only the relative impoverishment
of the proletariat, but also their absolute impoverishment. This is what
Lenin pointed out: 'The impoverishment of the workers is absolute. That
is to say, they become poorer and poorer, their lives more miserable,
their meals worse, and their stomachs less full. And they have to be
crowded into basements and attics."
<a id="8">[[8]](#bot_8)</a>

The major manifestations of the absolute impoverishment of
the proletariat are as follows:

First, the existence of a large number of unemployed workers.
Unemployment is the constant threat faced by the worker in a capitalist
country. Once he is unemployed, he loses his source of income. His
livelihood becomes a serious problem. This is an important indicator of
the deterioration of the material living conditions of the proletariat.
In the United States, the number of unemployed in 1945 was 1.1 million;
in 1955, 2.654 million; in 1968, 2.8 million; and in 1971, it rose to 5
million. In England, the unemployment situation was also very serious.
The number of unemployed workers in 1952 was 500,000. By February 1972,
it had increased to more than 1.6 million.

Second, the decline of real wages. The lot of the employed workers in a
capitalist country is not any better. The wage of the worker is often
below the value of labor power, so that it is difficult for the worker
to maintain normal livelihood. Sometimes through struggles with the
capitalist, the nominal wage may be increased a little. But since
widespread inflation exists in the capitalist countries, the increase in
the money wage is often behind the increase in prices. In the end, not
only is the real wage not increased, it may even decline. For example,
according to official United States statistics, from December 1969 to
December 1970 the wages of manufacturing workers increased by 2.6
percent. In the same period, the consumer price index rose by 5.5
percent. Therefore, the real wage of the manufacturing workers declined
by 2.9 percent. Besides, there are numerous taxes in the capitalist
countries which take away a substantial portion of the income of the
laboring people. According to official United States statistics: In the
thirty years between 1940 and 1970, the amount of taxation increased by
sixteen times. The total private debt of the United States (including
housing mortgages and consumer credit) was 197.8 billion dollars,
averaging \$1,133 per capita. At the end of 1970, the total private debt
rose to 577.9 billion dollars, averaging \$2,832 per capita. In 1970,
repayment of debts and payment of interest of the American people
amounted to an average of 22.3 percent of their annual incomes.
Taxation, repayment of debts, and payment of interest
amounted to about half of the annual income of the American people.

Third, poor living conditions. Because of low real wages, the worker in
a capitalist country must put up with poor living conditions. Poor
living conditions are especially pronounced with respect to housing
conditions. Due to the anarchic conditions of production in capitalist
society and the blind concentration of industrial production and
population, the size of a few cities gets larger and larger, and the
housing conditions of the worker steadily deteriorate. Marx pointed out,
"The faster the capital accumulation of an industrial city or a
commercial city, the faster the inflow of human material available for
exploitation, and the worse the temporary accommodations arranged for
them." <a id="9">[[9]](#bot_9)</a> Marx and
Engels commented several times in their works on the deterioration of
the worker's housing conditions under capitalism and described the
extremely poor conditions of the slum areas in big cities such as
London. Today, the number of slums in the big cities of the capitalist
countries is still increasing. In New York City, the biggest American
city, the number of people living in slum areas was 1.664 million in
1950. By 1957, it had increased to 2.572 million. The total population
of the United States in 1959 was about 180 million, of which 22 million
lived in urban slums with 44 million people living in substandard
dwellings.

Pollution hazards such as exhaust fumes, waste materials, and effluents
further degrade the worker's housing conditions and adversely affect his
health. The more developed industry is, the more serious the urban
pollution is. The rich capitalists can live in their garden villas in
the suburbs and leave the working masses behind to suffer. In some big
cities of the capitalist countries which have serious air pollution,
each inhabitant inhales a large amount of poisonous gases. In these
cities, the incidence of emphysema, bronchitis, and asthma is very high,
and the resulting casualty rate is correspondingly high. In Europe, the
United States, and Japan, the number of workers who are dismissed
because of emphysema is increasing.

In the United States, as far as medical care conditions are
concerned, "the front doors of the hospital are wide open,
but there is no entry for the sick who cannot afford to pay." The
registration fee for one visit amounts to one-third of the daily wage of
a worker with medium income. The operating fee for appendicitis amounts
to more than two months' wages. An ordinary worker's family must save
for several months before they can afford the delivery fee. From 1965 to
1972, the annual increase in hospitalization fees was 12.3 percent on
the average. The consulting fee increased by an annual average of 6.1
percent. Many workers go to work even when they are ill because they
cannot afford to pay the consulting fee, and they die prematurely as a
result.

Fourth, excessive labor intensity and poor laboring conditions. With the
development of mechanization and automation in enterprises, not only are
workers increasingly converted into appendages of machines, but labor
intensity is also greatly increased. One American auto worker
complained: "In ancient Greece and the Roman Empire, even the
unfortunate sailor could rest beside his oar for awhile when the wind
was favorable. Now, the worker working beside a conveyer belt cannot
even take a breath when the machine parts come rolling one after
another." As a result of the adoption of the "acceleration system" to
intensify exploitation and oppression of the worker, some workers in
American plants lose their labor capacity after working for eight to ten
years. Many more workers cannot adjust to fast work when they reach
forty years old. Because of the fast working pace and the lack of labor
protection facilities, accidents at work are numerous. The United States
government has to admit that at least 85 percent of American workers
work under the constant risk of injury. Every year 3 to 5 percent of
American workers die or are injured in industrial accidents. Thus, the
advancements in science and technology in the capitalist countries are
achieved at the expense of the working class's steady impoverishment and
misery.

It is irrefutable, as demonstrated by the above-mentioned facts, that
impoverishment does exist in capitalist society. The
bourgeoisie and their agents hidden in the ranks of the proletariat
attempt in vain to deny the existence of the proletariat's
impoverishment by pointing to the phenomena of some temporary, local,
and partial improvements.

First, we must analyze the question of the impoverishment of the
proletariat from the class viewpoint. We must first eliminate those
worker-aristocrats in the ranks of the proletariat who have been bought
by the bourgeoisie. A handful of worker-aristocrats has indeed enjoyed a
higher standard of living at the charity of the bourgeoisie. They are no
longer members of the workers' ranks, but renegades of the proletariat.

On the issue of the impoverishment of the proletariat, we must analyze
it from an historical and concrete viewpoint. Since the standards of
living at different times and in different countries are not the same,
it is impermissible to make a simple comparison of the present with the
past. In the past, even an emperor could only use oil lamps. Today, most
workers in the capitalist countries use electric lights. One cannot say
that since the workers have electric lights there is no poverty. Would
it not be absurd to claim that the life of a worker today is better than
that of an emperor?

On the issue of the impoverishment of the proletariat, we must take an
overall viewpoint. The so-called overall viewpoint means that we should
not judge the living conditions of the workers on the basis of an
individual plant, a special locality, or a specific period. We should
judge the living conditions of the working class over a long period of
time. In other words, we must look at not only the living conditions of
the employed workers, but also at the living conditions of the
unemployed and semiunemployed workers. We must look at not only the
living conditions of the working class in the imperialist countries, but
also at the living conditions of the working class in the colonies. We
must look at not only the living conditions of the working class in
times of illusory capitalist prosperity, but also at the working
conditions of the working class in times of economic crisis. Then, it is
not difficult to tell that while the living conditions of
the workers might have improved in individual plants and localities and
at some particular times, the conditions of the whole working class are
steadily becoming poorer.

[The Proletariat Is the Gravedigger of Capitalism](#)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The process of capital accumulation is the process by which the
bourgeoisie gets richer and the proletariat gets poorer. It is also a
process in which the contradictions between the production relations and
productive forces of capitalism are increasingly more acute. In the
development process of the capitalist economy, scattered, isolated, and
small-scale individual production is transformed into large-scale social
production. The development of social production under capitalism
consists of two aspects: First, the capitalist plant is different from
the small workshop of the individual handicraftsman. In the handicraft
workshop, the handicraftsman single-handedly completes the production
process. In the capitalist plant, tens, hundreds, or thousands of
workers are distributed in various workshops and sections. They complete
the manufacture of commodities through division of labor and cooperation
under the orders of the capitalist and his agents. Second, social
division of labor steadily develops. Production becomes more
specialized. The various departments and enterprises in social
production are closely associated and dependent on one another. With the
development of intraplant and social division of labor, production is
"transformed from a series of individual actions into a series of social
actions. Products are transformed from individual products into social
products." <a id="10">[[10]](#bot_10)</a> Lathes,
automobiles, cotton fabrics, and leather shoes are products of the joint
labor of many workers. Nobody can say, "This is my product."

Production becomes social in nature. But the means of production and the
products from social labor do not belong to society. They belong to the
capitalist himself. Thus, contradictions between social production and
capitalist private ownership arise. This is the basic contradiction of
capitalism. Capitalist private ownership severely restricts the
development of large-scale social production. Capitalist
production relations increasingly restrict the development of productive
forces and become fetters to the development of productive forces. Only
by demolishing private ownership and establishing socialist collective
ownership and by substituting socialist production relations for
capitalist relations can this basic contradiction be resolved.
Therefore, the extinction of capitalism and the emergence of socialism
is an inevitable trend of historical development that cannot be changed
by man's will.

But the historical process in which socialism replaces capitalism cannot
be spontaneously realized. The bourgeoisie, which benefits from the
capitalist system, will inevitably obstruct the social transformation.
To realize this transformation, there must be a social force that
crushes the resistance of the bourgeoisie. This social force is the
proletariat. The proletariat is the representative of advanced
productive forces. It is oppressed and exploited, but it is the most
conscious class with the most thoroughly revolutionary nature. Under the
education of Marxism, it will surely rise to overthrow the capitalist
system. "The contradiction between social production and capitalist
possession is expressed as the opposition between the proletariat and
the bourgeoisie." <a id="11">[[11]](#bot_11)</a>
The proletariat matures and grows steadily in the process of capital
accumulation.

The process of capital accumulation and expanded reproduction is not
only the expanded reproduction of material means of livelihood, but also
the expanded reproduction of capitalist production relations. It
produces bigger capitalists on the one hand and more hired laborers on
the other. Therefore, the process of capital accumulation not only
prepares the material conditions for the extinction of capitalism,
namely large-scale production on a social basis, but also produces the
gravedigger of capitalism --- the proletariat. "The bourgeoisie not only
has forged weapons for its own destruction, it has also trained people
who will use these weapons --- modern workers, namely the proletariat."
<a id="12">[[12]](#bot_12)</a> The
proletariat emerged with the appearance of capitalism and strengthened
and became conscious in the process of capital accumulation. With the
development of capital accumulation, the ranks of the proletariat
gradually swell; with large-scale social production, organizational
discipline is instilled in the proletariat; and with the impoverishment
of the proletariat, the contradictions between the proletariat and the
bourgeoisie steadily deepen. Experienced in class struggle and armed
with Marxism, the proletariat becomes a forward-looking, selfless class
richly endowed with revolutionary thoroughness.

In the process of capital accumulation, the great development of social
production inevitably reaches a stage when it can no longer be
accommodated in the capitalist bombshell. Marx confidently announced:
"This bombshell will explode. The knell of capitalist private ownership
is about to toll. The expropriator will be expropriated."
<a id="13">[[13]](#bot_13)</a> Capitalism will
surely pass away, and socialism will triumph. This is an historical
tendency of capital accumulation.

### _Major Study References_

Marx, _Capital_, Vol. 1, Part 7.

Marx, "The Impoverishment of the Capitalist Society."

Chairman Mao, "The Bankruptcy of the Idealist Conception of History."

### _Review Problems_

1\. What conclusions can we reach by the analysis of simple reproduction
and expanded reproduction?

2\. What are the reasons for worker unemployment and the impoverishment
of the proletariat in capitalist society?

3\. Why do we say that the proletariat is the gravedigger of capitalism?

_Notes_
-------------------

<a id="bot_s_a">[\*](#s_a)</a> Tzu-pen-chu-i she-hui ti p'in fu yüeh lai yû'eh
hsüan-shu --- tzu-pen chi-lei ho wu-ch'an chieh-chi p'in-k'un-hua.

<a id="bot_1">[[1]](#1)</a> Marx, _Capital_, Vol. 1, _Complete
Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 23, p. 625.

<a id="bot_2">[[2]](#2)</a> Ibid., p. 649.

<a id="bot_3">[[3]](#3)</a> Ibid., pp. 649-650.

<a id="bot_4">[[4]](#4)</a> Ibid., p. 672.

<a id="bot_5">[[5]](#5)</a> Ibid., p. 692.

<a id="bot_6">[[6]](#6)</a> "The Bankruptcy of the Idealist Conception of
History," _Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung_, Vol. 4, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1968, pp. 1400-1401.

<a id="bot_7">[[7]](#7)</a> Marx, _Capital_, Vol. 1, _Complete
Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 23, p. 707.

<a id="bot_8">[[8]](#8)</a> "The Impoverishment of the Capitalist Society,"
_Complete Works of Lenin_, Vol. 18, p. 430.

<a id="bot_9">[[9]](#9)</a> Marx, _Capital_, Vol. 1,
_Complete Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 23, p. 725.

<a id="bot_10">[[10]](#10)</a> Engels, _Anti-Duhring_,
_Selected Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 3, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 309.

<a id="bot_11">[[11]](#11)</a> Ibid., p. 311.

<a id="bot_12">[[12]](#12)</a> _Communist Manifesto_, _Selected
Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 1, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she,
1972, p. 257.

<a id="bot_13">[[13]](#13)</a> Marx, _Capital_, Vol. 1,
_Complete Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 23, pp. 831-832.
