[*3* The Analysis of Capitalist Society Must Start from Commodities](#) 
========================================================================================================

[Commodities, Money, and the Law of
Value](#)<a id="s_a">[\*](#bot_s_a)

Chairman Mao points out: Marx "started from the simplest capitalist
factor --- commodities --- to analyze closely the economic structure of
the capitalist society."
<a id="1">[[1]](#bot_1)</a> Why did Marx start
from commodities in his analysis of capitalist economy? This is because
every product in the capitalist society is a commodity. Not only are
means of production and consumer goods commodities, even human labor is
a commodity. Here, social wealth is reflected as a large amount of
accumulated commodities. Commodities become the cell structures of the
capitalist economy. In commodities are embodied all the contradictions
of capitalism. Therefore, the study of capitalism must start from an
analysis of commodities.

[The Commodity Relation Embodies the Seeds of All Capitalist Contradictions](#)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _Commodities Consist of Two Components: A Use Value and an Exchange Value_

Commodities, the product of labor, are for sale and exchange. They went
through a historical process of birth and development. In the primitive
society, people labored together. The products obtained were all
consumed by the members of the primitive commune. Under
these conditions, there was no exchange or production of commodities.
The exchange and production of commodities developed gradually in the
slave and feudal society. Their development reached a peak in the
capitalist world.

What are the basic characteristics of commodities which are the cells of
the capitalist economy?

Since commodities are labor products for exchange, they must first of
all be useful to people. For example, rice can fill our stomachs,
clothes can keep us warm, iron and steel can be made into machines, and
tractors can plow. This usefulness of a commodity is called use value.
Obviously, if something is not useful, nobody needs it. It cannot,
therefore, qualify as a commodity.

Use value is a necessary condition of a commodity but not the only
condition. Not all useful things are commodities. For example, air and
sunshine are basic necessities for our survival, but they are not labor
products. They are free goods and therefore not commodities. Further,
though food grains and vegetables are labor products, if they are
produced for one's own consumption, they are not commodities. Again,
though food grains turned in by the peasant to the landlord as rent are
not for the peasant's own consumption, they are not paid for by the
landlord and cannot, therefore, be regarded as commodities.

Labor products can become commodities only if they are transferred to
other people through exchange. Therefore, in addition to use value,
commodities must also be exchangeable for other products. This
characteristic of commodities is called exchange value.

Exchange value is first expressed as a numerical proportion between one
use value and another use value. For example, one [chang] of
cloth is exchanged for two [tou] of rice. The two
[tou] of rice is the value in exchange for one
[chang] of cloth.

The numerical exchange proportion between two commodities varies
according to time and place. But at a given time and place, this
proportion is, on the whole, uniform. What determines this exchange
proportion? Obviously, if various Commodities can, in the
course of exchange, establish among them numerical proportions, they
must have something in common. This common property cannot be their use
values. From the viewpoint of their use values, every commodity is
different in nature. For example, cloth can be made into clothes, and
rice can fill our stomachs. These are two entirely different use values
and cannot be compared. The common property among the commodities must
be found in their exchange value. And when the use value of both
commodities, whether cloth or rice, is ignored, the only characteristic
left is that they are both labor products. Labor has been expended for
their production. This embodied labor constitutes value. Values are
comparable, and therefore commodities can be compared in quantity. The
fact that one [chang] of cloth can be exchanged for two
[tou] of rice implies that their production requires an
equal quantity of labor. Consequently, they are equal in value. Exchange
value is therefore determined by value. Exchange value is an expression
of value. Value itself is the basis of exchange value.

Use value and value are the two characteristics of commodities. They
constitute the two factors of commodities. Use value is the material
support for value. If one commodity has no use value, no matter how much
labor has been expended on it, no value can be formed. And it cannot be
a commodity in exchange for other labor products. At the same time, only
use value created by labor can become the use value of commodities. Even
if something is absolutely essential for our survival, such as air and
sunshine, it cannot become a commodity unless labor has been expended on
it.

### _The Duality of Commodities Is Determined by the Duality of Labor Used in Commodity Production_

Where does the duality of commodities come from? When we go to the
source, we discover that labor used for commodity production has a dual
nature: it consists of concrete labor on the one hand and abstract labor
on the other.

To produce various use values, people have to engage in
various purposeful production activities. For example,
carpenters make tables, and peasants raise crops. They all have their
own tools, their objects, and their methods. The labor of a peasant
consists of using various farm tools to plow, rake, plant, and harvest,
finally producing food crops. This labor expended in different concrete
forms is called concrete labor. Concrete labor creates use value. There
are many different use values for commodities. There are also many
different forms of concrete labor in commodity production. Concrete
labor in various trades and occupations is different, a manifestation of
a complex division of labor.

Various concrete labor is different in nature and cannot be compared.
But in the market, various labor products can be compared. This shows
that labor expended on commodity production not only has an aspect of
difference, but also an aspect of similarity.

What is this similarity? It lies in the fact that although labor is
different in its concrete forms for the production of various
commodities, it is basically an expenditure of physical and mental human
labor. This homogeneous labor abstracted from its concrete
characteristics is called abstract labor. The value of commodities is
created by abstract labor. Earlier, we said labor embodied in
commodities constitutes value. Now, after analyzing the duality of
labor, we can be more specific about the meaning of value. Value is the
abstract labor embodied in commodities.

Concrete labor and abstract labor are not two different types of labor.
They are merely two aspects of the same labor. People must engage in
various forms of concrete labor in the production of various use values
for the satisfaction of various needs. Concrete labor expresses the
relation between man and Nature. On the other hand, abstract labor
provides a unified measure to compare the labor expended on the
production of various commodities. Therefore, abstract labor expresses
the social relation in which labor is exchanged among people under the
condition of commodity production.

### _The Value of Commodities Is Determined by the Socially Necessary Labor_

The value of commodities is created by labor. Its level is determined by
the labor expended on the production of commodities. And the volume of
labor is measured by labor time. The longer the labor time needed for
the production of a commodity, the larger the volume of labor and the
higher the value.

Does this mean that the lazier and more unskilled a man is, the more
valuable the commodity he produces would be? Definitely not.

The production of a given commodity requires different labor time from
different commodity producers for obvious reasons. Some are more skilled
than others. And some use better tools and equipment than others. The
time required by those who are more skilled and use better tools and
equipment is naturally shorter than the time required by those less
skilled and using crude tools and equipment. Then, which labor time
should be used to determine the value of commodities?

The labor time expended by various commodity producers on commodity
production is called individual labor time. For example, some carpenters
spend thirty hours to make a table, some twenty-five hours, and others
twenty hours. These are all individual labor times. The value of
commodities is not determined by the individual labor time, but by the
socially necessary labor. "Socially necessary labor is such labor time
as is required for producing a use value under existing normal
conditions of production and with the average amount of skill and
intensity prevalent at the time."
<a id="2">[[2]](#bot_2)</a> If under normal
production conditions and with the average amount of skill and intensity
the required time to make a table is twenty-five hours, then twenty-five
hours are the socially necessary labor for making tables. Twenty-five
hours' labor is the socially necessary labor determining the value of a
table.

When we talk about labor determining value, we must distinguish between
not only individual labor and socially necessary labor, but also between
simple labor and complex labor. Simple labor is labor that
can be performed by a normal, healthy person without going through
special training. Complex labor is labor performed by a skilled worker
who has undergone certain special training. Therefore, in a given period
of time, the value created by simple labor is less than that created by
complex labor. Complex labor is multiple simple labor. The conversion
between complex and simple labor is spontaneously carried out in the
exchange process.

### _The Contradiction between Private Labor and Social Labor Is the Basic Contradiction of Commodity Production_

We have analyzed above the duality of commodities, the duality of labor
in commodity production, and the value of commodities. With this basic
understanding, we can further analyze the contradictions of commodity
production.

Commodities are used as exchange for labor products. Commodity producers
produce commodities not for their own needs, but for sale in exchange
for the commodities they need. For example, the blacksmith does not make
hoes because he needs them. What he is concerned about is selling the
hoes to realize their value for the exchange of the rice and cloth he
needs. Whether his commodities can be sold or not is of vital concern to
the commodity producer.

Commodities are a unifier between the opposites of use value and value.
Concrete labor and abstract labor in commodity production are also
opposites in unity. They are unified in a commodity, but they are also
opposites. If the commodity can be sold, their internal contradictions
are resolved. When a hoe reaches the hands of a peasant who needs it,
concrete labor is converted into abstract labor, and the blacksmith
obtains the value of his hoe. The use value and the value of the hoe are
also unified. But if the commodity cannot be sold, the contradiction
between use value and value and the contradiction between concrete labor
and abstract labor are immediately revealed. Although the hoe obviously
possesses use value, if it cannot be sold, its value cannot
be realized, and the hoe is no better than a heap of scrap. In this
case, the concrete labor of the blacksmith, which also obviously
represents the expenditure of physical and mental labor, cannot be
converted into abstract labor. In other words, his labor is not
recognized by society and is as good as wasted. Under these conditions,
the blacksmith has no means to purchase pig iron and charcoal with which
to engage in more production. He certainly has no means to buy fuel,
rice, oil, and salt to support himself. The contradictions between use
value and value and between concrete and abstract labor bear directly
upon the production and livelihood of the commodity producer.

How do these contradictions in commodity production arise? Where are
their origins? There is one basic contradiction in commodity production
under private ownership. This is the contradiction between private and
social labor. Since commodities are labor products used for exchange and
since the use value created by the producer is not for the satisfaction
of his own needs but to satisfy social needs, the labor of the commodity
producer is social in nature. It is a part of total social labor. But
under the condition of private ownership, what and how much to produce
and the size of his income are the private affairs of the producer.
Therefore, the labor of the commodity producer also possesses the nature
of private labor. This contradiction between private and social labor is
the source of all contradictions of commodity production under private
ownership. When the commodities produced by the private producer are
sold in the market, it shows that his private labor is recognized by
society and constitutes a part of the social labor. If the commodities
cannot be sold, the private labor of the commodity producer is not
recognized by society and cannot be converted into social labor. The
concrete labor of the commodity producer cannot be converted into
abstract labor. The value of commodities cannot, therefore, be realized.

### _Marx's Labor Theory of Value Is the Basis of the Theory of Surplus Value_

Through the analysis of the duality of labor, Marx firmly created the
labor theory of value. This theory scientifically demonstrates that
concrete labor creates the use value of commodities, while abstract
labor creates the value of commodities and labor is the sole source of
value. Marx's labor theory of value is the basis of Marx's theory of
surplus value and is an important constituent part of Marxist political
economy.

Before the proletariat received the guidance of Marxist theory, they did
not realize the source of their sufferings and could not identify the
objects of their struggle. Some mistakenly thought that their sufferings
were caused by machines and once resorted to destroying machines as a
method of struggle. Marx summarized the long experience of the
proletarian struggle and created the theory of surplus value to expose
the secret of capitalist exploitation. This made the proletariat realize
their historical mission and the fact that only through violent
revolution and the replacement of capitalism by socialism could they be
liberated. Marx's theory of surplus value is based on the labor theory
of value. Without the labor theory of value, the theory of surplus value
could not have been established.

Because Marx's labor theory of value provided theoretical guidance to
proletarian revolutionary struggles, bourgeois economists tried their
best to establish all sorts of antiscientific theories of value in a
vain attempt to separate the relations between value and labor, to
oppose Marx's labor theory of value, and to conceal capitalist
exploitation.

Among the vulgar economists, a production-costs theory of value was once
much in vogue. This theory says that the value of a commodity is
determined by the costs of production (the value of the means of
production and labor wages) expended on its production. If the value of
a commodity is in fact determined by the costs of production, then the
capitalist would only get back the costs of production expended when the
commodity is sold. How can he ever get rich this way? Where is the
exploitation of the worker? Therefore, those vulgar
economists who proposed that value was determined by the cost of
production necessarily explained profit as a form of higher wage, a
reward for abstinence, an award for risk. This fully exposed their ugly
role as apologists for the bourgeoisie.

Among the bourgeois vulgar economists, another utility theory of value
was also once in vogue. According to this theory, the value of a
commodity is determined by the amount of utility it possesses. What then
is "utility"? This is, in fact, the use value of a commodity. We said
earlier that various commodities had different use values which were not
comparable. It is simply not logical to say that the value of a
commodity is determined by its use value. The utility theorists of value
could not intelligently explain why such things as air and sunshine,
which are essential for human survival, did not possess any value and
could not be sold as commodities.

Another popular theory among the bourgeois vulgar economists was a
supply-demand theory of value. This theory denied that there was any
objective, intrinsic value in a commodity and thought that the value of
commodities was determined by the supply and demand conditions in the
market. When the supply of a certain commodity exceeded its demand, its
exchange value for other commodities was lower, and its value was lower.
But when the demand for a commodity exceeded its supply, its exchange
value for other commodities was higher, and its value was higher. This
theory was obviously fallacious. The supply-demand theorists of value
simply cannot explain what determines the value of a commodity when
supply is equal to demand; neither can they explain why, in the changing
relations between supply and demand for various commodities, some
commodities are consistently more expensive than others.

Although the bourgeois economists tried their best to negate the labor
theory of value, truth can never be negated. Marxist labor theory of
value has been proven to be the only correct theory in its struggle
against various pseudoscientific theories of the bourgeoisie.

[Money Is a Natural Product of the Development of Commodity Exchange](#)</a>
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _Money Is a Special Commodity Serving as a Universal Equivalent_

Money is associated with commodities because in daily life the value of
commodities is expressed in terms of money. And commodities are bought
with money. However, the value of commodities was not expressed in terms
of money from the start. Money is a product of the development of
commodity production and exchange.

Commodity exchange started out as direct barter among commodities. In
the beginning, the nomad tribes and agricultural tribes exchanged their
surplus products. For example, sheep were exchanged for rice. At that
time, the exchange of commodities was on an occasional basis and
occurred mainly among clan communes. In the course of exchange, the
value of a commodity was accidentally expressed in terms of another
commodity. For example, two sheep equal one bag of rice. The value of a
sheep could not be evaluated in terms of itself. But when sheep were
exchanged for rice, the value of a sheep was expressed in terms of rice.
In the above equation, commodities such as rice assumed the special role
of an "equivalent." They acted like a mirror and in them the value of
another commodity could be reflected.

With the development of productive forces and social division of labor,
commodity exchange daily developed. Both the volume and the variety of
commodities being exchanged increased. In the course of exchange, one
commodity could be traded for many other commodities. Its value could be
expressed in many other commodities. At the same time, with the
development of commodity exchange, the disadvantages of direct barter
among commodities were increasingly evident. Direct barters could be
concluded only when both sides happened to need what the other side had
to offer. For example, suppose that the owner of sheep wanted to
exchange them for food grains, but the owner of food grains
needed a hoe instead of sheep and the owner of hoes wanted cloth instead
of sheep or food grains. If the owner of cloth happened to want sheep,
then, the seller of sheep could obtain food grains by first exchanging
sheep for cloth, then cloth for hoes, and finally hoes for food grains.
The expected purpose of exchange was realized only after much trouble.
If the owner of cloth did not need sheep, then no matter how much
trouble he went through, he still could not get what he wanted.
Therefore, when commodity production increasingly developed, direct
barters proved to be extremely difficult.

In the course of commodity exchange, people gradually realized that if
they first exchanged what they had for some commodity (like sheep) which
was generally needed and used it to exchange for what they needed, then
the purpose of exchange could be realized in only two transactions.
Therefore, in the long developmental process of commodity exchange,
commodities such as sheep would be separated from other commodities and
perform a role not possible for other commodities. Then, the values of
all commodities were all expressed in terms of sheep. And sheep assumed
the role of a "universal equivalent" in commodity exchange.

In the long process of the development of commodity exchange, nations
used different mediums of exchange, including sheep, shells, cloth, and
metals. Finally, they decided to use precious metals such as gold and
silver as money. Because the precious metals are small in quantity but
great in value, easy to carry, readily divisible, and not perishable,
they are suitable for a medium of exchange. Hence, gold and silver are
generally accepted as money. Note, however, that money is not an innate
property of gold and silver; it is acquired. Gold and silver became
money under certain historical production relations.

From the origin of money, one can understand the nature of money. Money
is a special commodity separated from other commodities and serving as a
medium of exchange.

### _The Five Functions of Money Evolved Step by Step_

The property of money is manifested in its functions. Money possesses
five functions which are evolved in the process of commodity exchange.
These functions are to serve as (1) a unit of value, (2) a medium of
exchange, (3) a standard of payments, (4) a store of value, and (5) a
universal currency. Of these, the basic functions are as a unit of value
and as a medium of exchange. But they have all evolved with the
emergence of money.

The first function of money is as a unit of value. Just as a ruler is
used to measure the length of things, money is used to measure the value
of commodities. Money functioning as a measure of value can be
conceptual money. This is to say, when people use money to evaluate the
value of commodities, they need not have money in their hands. For
example, a table is worth ten yuan. But there is no need to put ten yuan
on the table. When the values of commodities are expressed in terms of
money, they are the prices of the commodities. Prices are the expression
of values in money terms. The prices of commodities are determined by
two factors. One is the value of the commodities themselves, and the
other is the value of money (gold, silver). The prices of commodities
are directly proportional to the value of the commodities themselves and
inversely proportional to the value of money. For example, a buffalo is
worth five hundred hours of social labor and one ounce of gold is worth
five hundred hours of social labor. Then, the price of a buffalo is one
ounce of gold. If the labor productivity of gold miners is doubled and
one ounce of gold is now worth only two hundred and fifty hours of
social labor, then, even though the value of a buffalo has not changed a
bit, the price of a buffalo has doubled.

The second function of money is as a medium of exchange, namely, it
serves as a medium of commodity circulation. Commodity circulation is
commodity exchange by means of money. Before the appearance of money,
commodities were bartered directly. In terms of a formula, it is
expressed as commodity equals commodity. After the
appearance of money, all commodities were exchanged in terms of money.
In terms of a formula, it is expressed as commodity equals money equals
commodity. This role of money as a medium in commodity circulation is
the function of money as a medium of exchange.

The money used as a medium of exchange was originally gold and silver
pieces of different sizes and weights. This was later replaced by coins.
Coins were merely minted metal pieces of uniform shape, purity, and
weight certified by the state. The coins of various countries were all
different. In China's late Shang dynasty, coins began to be minted with
copper. The oldest coins were made of copper and shaped like farm tools.
They were known as [pu ch'ien]. In the Chou dynasty, in
addition to [pu ch'ien], there were [tao ch'ien]
and [yuan ch'ien]. [Yin yuan] \[silver dollars\]
were first minted in the Kuang-hsü period of the Ch'ing dynasty. Each
[yin yuan] consisted of 0.72 ounces of silver.

In the course of circulation, coins were worn out and part of their
value was lost. But even then coins were still accepted at their full
value. This was because the function of money as a medium of exchange
was performed in one instant. People exchanged their commodities for
money merely in order to use it to buy the commodities they needed. The
primary concern of the commodity owners was whether the money could be
used as a medium of exchange and not whether the money had its full
worth. For this reason, not only could worn metal money be used as a
medium of exchange, but even pure value symbols in the form of paper
notes could take its place.

Since paper money in place of metal money serves as a medium of exchange
in commodity circulation, the amount of paper money issued is limited to
the amount of metal money needed for commodity circulation. Marx pointed
out: "The amount of paper money issued, which is a token or symbol of
real money, always equals the value of the gold (or silver) needed for
commodity circulation."
<a id="3">[[3]](#bot_3)</a> If the
paper money issued equals the amount of metal money needed for commodity
circulation, then the paper money shall possess the same purchasing
power as the metal money. If the amount of paper money issued exceeds
the amount of metal money needed for commodity circulation, then the
value of the total paper money still equals the metal money needed for
commodity circulation, but the unit value of the paper money shall fall
in terms of the metal money. Hence, the value of the paper money
depreciates, and commodity prices appreciate. For example, if, in a
given period, the amount of metal money needed for circulation were 100
million yuan but the amount of paper money were 200 million yuan, then
the value of paper money would be halved. The purchasing power of 1 yuan
of paper money would be equivalent only to 0.5 yuan of metal money.

This depreciation of paper money resulting from the issue of paper money
in excess of the amount of metal money needed for circulation is called
inflation. In capitalist society, inflation is an important means by
which the bourgeois state plunders its people. The result of inflation
is the depreciation of paper money and rising prices. On the other hand,
the increases in the money wages of the workers lag far behind the
increases in prices, resulting in decreases of their real wages and
their standard of living. At the same time, the exploitative income of
the bourgeoisie increases rapidly. In old China, the issue of legal
tender reached astronomical figures, leading to galloping inflation and
quantum jumps in prices. Some people once calculated that the purchasing
power of 100 yuan of legal tender in 1937 was two buffaloes. In 1938, it
was one buffalo. In 1941, it was one pig. In 1947, it was one-third of a
box of matches. In 1948, it could not even buy one-third of a
matchstick.

The third function of money is as a means of hoarding. The development
of the money relation of commodities increasingly made money into a
symbol of social wealth. When the natural economy played a dominant
role, the accumulation of wealth assumed the form of food grains, cloth,
and silk goods. After the money relation of commodities was developed,
because money could be used to purchase any commodity, the accumulation
of wealth increasingly adopted the form of hoarding money (gold and
silver). This money which was temporarily retired from commodity
circulation and hoarded by its owner became hoarded money.
It served the function as a means of hoarding.

The fourth function of money is as a means of payment. With the
development of commodity production and exchange, transactions on credit
increasingly developed. When a debt was due, payment had to be made in
money. But at that time, commodity exchange had already been completed.
Here, money no longer served as a medium of exchange, but rather as a
means of payment. As a means of payment, money was first used among
commodity producers to settle debts. Later, its use went beyond the
sphere of commodity circulation. This function was also instrumental in
the payment of rent, interest, and taxes.

The fifth function of money is as a world currency. With commodity
exchange proceeding beyond a nation-state, international trade
developed, and a new function of money was created. This was the
function of a world currency. Only gold and silver could serve as world
currency.

In the world market, gold first served as a means of payment to settle
international accounts. This was the major function of a world currency.
Next, in the world market, gold was also used as a means of payment to
buy various commodities. Finally, gold was transferred from one country
to another as a symbol of social wealth. For example, the payment of war
indemnities, capital export, and other transfers of gold and silver from
one country to another served this function.

The above five functions of money are organically related and are
different expressions of the nature of money. They are the expressions
of the different roles assumed by a universal equivalent in the
development of commodity circulation.

[The Law of Value Is the Economic Law of Commodity Production](#)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _The Objective Requirement of the Law of Value Is Equivalence in Exchange_

The law of value is the economic law of commodity production and
exchange. The basic content of this law is this: The value
of a commodity is determined by the socially necessary
labor. Commodities must be exchanged according to their values. That is,
there must be equivalence in exchange. Wherever and whenever the
conditions of a commodity economy exist, the law of value has a role to
play. Marx said, "In the anarchic and constantly changing trade
relations of private labor products, the socially necessary labor time
for their production forcibly clears its own path as a regulatory law of
nature, just as the law of gravity forcibly clears its own path when a
house falls on a person's head."
<a id="4">[[4]](#bot_4)</a> In other words, in
commodity exchange, although because of the influence of the
supply-demand relation the proportions in which commodities are
exchanged may change continuously so that the socially necessary labor
(the value) embodied in two commodities being exchanged may not be
exactly equal, in the long run, commodity exchange necessarily involves
equivalence in exchange. The values being exchanged must be identical.

Why is the objective tendency of commodity exchange toward equivalence
in exchange? This is because commodity producers are all concerned about
how much of others' commodities their own commodities can be exchanged
for. Due to the influence of the supply-demand relations, the
proportions in which commodities are exchanged constantly change. People
increase production of commodities which are more profitable and
decrease production of commodities that are less profitable. As a
result, the supply of the former commodities exceeds the demand for
them, and their exchange values decrease. The supply of the latter
commodities falls below the demand for them, and their exchange values
increase. This constant change in the proportions at which commodities
are exchanged demonstrates that equivalence in exchange is an objective
law which does not change according to people 's will.

With the appearance of money, all commodity exchanges depend on money as
a medium. Values are expressed as prices. The law of value requires
equivalence in exchange. In other words, it requires the equivalence
between prices and values. Needless to say, the equivalence between
prices and values must be understood as a long-term
tendency. In fact, in a commodity economy based on private ownership in
which production is uncoordinated, there are constant dislocations in
the supply of and demand for commodities in the market, leading to
constant fluctuations of prices. Although changes in the supply-demand
relations lead to fluctuations in prices, the fluctuations are always
centered around the equilibrium values. Therefore, nonequivalence
between prices and values due to the influence of the supply-demand
relations does not imply the negation of the law of value, but rather a
necessary form through which the law of value operates.

### _The Three Functions of the Law of Value Which Arise in the Course of Market Competition_

The law of value performs three functions in commodity production based
on private ownership. These functions are realized through the
spontaneous force of market competition.

First, the law of value is a regulator of production. It spontaneously
regulates the distribution of social labor and the means of production
among various production sectors. Commodity production based on private
ownership is conducted under the condition of competition and anarchy.
Nobody has direct information on what or how much society needs. But
some order, allocations, and arrangements are necessary for the
continuation of social production. These allocations and arrangements
are regulated by the law of value and realized through the spontaneous
influence of market price fluctuations. If the supply of a certain
commodity does not meet the demand for it, its price will rise above its
value, and the production of this commodity becomes especially
profitable. The production of this commodity will thereby be increased.
If the reverse is true, its price will fall below its value, and its
production will be decreased. It is in this way that the law of value
directs the activities of commodity producers and regulates the
distribution of labor and the means of production among various
production sectors.

Although the regulation of social production by the law of
value imposes certain order in the commodity economy based on private
ownership, this order is achieved under the condition of anarchy. It is
constantly destroyed by blind competition, and a new order is again
spontaneously formed. The establishment of this kind of order is
achieved through an immense waste of social labor. Just as Marx said,
"This orderless motion is its order."
<a id="5">[[5]](#bot_5)</a>

Second, the law of value stimulates the improvement of production
techniques and labor productivity. Labor productivity is measured by the
amount of products produced in one unit of time. Expressed as a formula:
labor productivity equals amount of products divided by labor time. The
level of labor productivity is determined by many factors. The most
important ones are the skill of labor, the state of technology and its
application to production, and the extent of division of labor and
cooperation. According to the objective requirement of the law of value,
commodities are sold according to the values determined by the socially
necessary labor. Therefore, whoever is more skilled, more efficient, and
uses less than the socially necessary labor time will get more profit.
This stimulates the commodity producer to pay attention to improving his
production techniques and labor productivity. But under private
ownership, the improvement of production techniques by the commodity
producer is for the sake of higher profits. Those who possess new
techniques will naturally keep them secret. Under these conditions, the
development of social productive forces is hindered.

Third, the law of value promotes polarization among commodity producers.
This is because the production conditions of various commodity producers
are all different. The individual labor time used to produce a certain
commodity varies widely. But the law of value requires that commodities
are sold according to the value determined by the socially necessary
labor. Thus, those commodity producers with better production facilities
and with individual labor time less than the socially necessary labor
time will make a higher profit and develop faster. On the
other hand, those commodity producers with poorer production facilities
and with individual labor time higher than the socially necessary labor
time will not survive the competition. Thus, the polarization among
commodity producers is inevitable.

[Expose the Mystery of Commodity Fetishism](#)</a>
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Fetishism originally referred to religions in which people worshiped
things believed to possess certain mystical power. When the level of
social productive forces was low and the control people exercised over
Nature was weak, they made natural forces mysterious. They thought
natural forces like thunder, lightning, water, and fire were controlled
by certain gods and therefore worshiped them. This also happened in the
commodity economy under private ownership. Although commodities are made
by people's hands, they were worshiped as gods and believed to hold
people's destiny. Marx called this phenomenon commodity fetishism.

How did commodity fetishism come about?

Under private ownership commodity production, the relations among men
were manifested in commodity relations. Commodities were treated as if
they were something above men, their master. The destiny of the
commodity producer was entirely associated with the destiny of
commodities. His destiny was entirely determined by whether and how well
his commodities could be sold. If his commodities could be sold at
profitable prices, the commodity producer would be well off. But if they
could not be sold or could only be sold at very low prices, he would be
poor. The commodity producer had no way of knowing beforehand whether
there was a demand for his commodities or whether the commodities could
be sold at good prices. The prices of commodities were not determined by
the individual producers, but rather by the spontaneous forces of the
operation of the law of value in the market. It was this condition that
led the commodity producer to feel that his destiny was beyond his own
control and was decided by the fate of his commodities in the market.

After the appearance of money as a universal equivalent
which could be freely exchanged for all commodities, there arose an
illusion that money itself had a special magical power that could affect
people's destiny. Therefore, commodity fetishism inevitably developed
into money fetishism.

Marx was the first one to reveal the mystery of commodity fetishism.
Marx's theory on the relations between commodities and money permitted
the revelation of the relations among people, while bourgeois economists
could see only the relations among things and the social relations among
them concealed by things. Marx's theory irrefutably demonstrated that
the relation between commodities and money will not hold eternally, but
will be a passing historical phenomenon. Therefore, the capitalist
economic system with commodities as its cells is not eternal. Things
that were created under certain historical conditions will disappear
when the historical conditions change. This is an objective law that
cannot be changed according to people's will.

### _Major Study References_

Marx, _Capital_, Vol. 1, Chapters 1, 3.

Engels, _Anti-Duhring_, Part 2, Chapter 5.

Lenin, _Karl Marx_, ("Marx's Economic Theories").

### _Review Problems_

1.  Why do we say that commodity relations embody all the seeds of
    capitalist contradictions?
2.  What are the major content and meanings of Marx's labor theory of
    value?
3.  What are the roles played by the law of value in a commodity economy
    based on private ownership?

_Notes_
-------------------------------

<a id="bot_s_a">[[\*]](#s_a)</a> Chieh-p'o tzu-pen-chu-i she-hui pi-hsü ts 'ung
shang-p'in k'ai-shih --- shang-p'in, huo-pi, chia-chih kuei-lii.

<a id="bot_1">[[1]](#1)</a> "The Rectification of the Party's Style of
Work," _Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung_, Vol. 3, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 775.

<a id="bot_2">[[2]](#2)</a> Marx, _Capital_, Vol. 1, _Complete
Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 23, p. 52.

<a id="bot_3">[[3]](#3)</a> Ibid., p. 147.

<a id="bot_4">[[4]](#4)</a> Ibid., p. 92.

<a id="bot_5">[[5]](#5) Marx, _Wage Labor and Capital_,
_Selected Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 1, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 360.
