[*11* Soviet Revisionist Social Imperialism Joins the Ranks of World Imperialism](#) 
=======================================================================================================================

[Social Imperialism Is Socialism in Name But Imperialism in
Substance](#)<a id="bot_s_a">[\*](#s_a)</a>

In the process of imperialism's gradual extinction, there emerged, in
the mid-twentieth century, Soviet social imperialism. Under the
leadership of Lenin and Stalin, Russia was once a great socialist
country. But after Stalin passed away, the renegade clique of Khrushchev
and Brezhnev launched a counter-revolutionary coup, seized Party and
government power, restored capitalism in a big way, and transformed the
Soviet Union into a social imperialist country.

During the First World War, Lenin denounced Kautsky, the head of the
German Social Democratic Party at that time, as being a '"social
imperialist,' that is, one who is nominally a socialist, but actually an
imperialist."
<a id="1">[[1]](#bot_1)</a> The
renegade clique of Brezhnev, like Kautsky, is also social imperialist.
The only difference is that it not only peddles revisionism, but also
defends imperialism. What is more, it controls state power, and has
transformed a great country created by Lenin himself into a social
imperialist country. Social imperialism is imperialism with a
"socialist" label. The fact that it emerged in the Soviet Union, Lenin's
homeland and once a great socialist country, makes it more deceptive and
dangerous. It is a very vicious imperialism indeed.

[State Monopoly Capitalism Is the Main Economic Basis of Social Imperialism](#)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _The Formation of the Soviet Union's State Monopoly Capitalism_

Whether it is capital imperialism or social imperialism, they are
identical in their basic economic characteristics. Their main economic
basis is monopoly capitalism. But, in capital imperialist countries,
there are two forms of monopoly capitalist economy, namely, private and
state monopoly capitalism. In social imperialist countries, monopoly
capitalism always takes the form of state monopoly capitalism. State
monopoly capitalism is the main economic basis of social imperialism.
This difference between social and capital imperialism is determined by
the different historical conditions under which monopoly capital was
created.

The monopoly capital of the capital imperialist countries was formed
gradually in the process of acute competition in the private capitalist
economy through capital accumulation and concentration. There, private
monopoly capitalism appeared first and existed on a large scale. Only
after private monopoly capitalism had developed to a certain extent and
when monopoly capital and state power had combined with the state
machinery to serve monopoly capital did state monopoly capitalism arise.
State monopoly capitalism in the social imperialist country appeared
when the people in power taking the capitalist road usurped the Party
and government power in the socialist country and, in the process,
transformed the socialist economy to restore capitalism.

After the Soviet renegade clique usurped the Party and government power
in the Soviet Union, the Russian bourgeois privileged
stratum greatly expanded its own political and economic
power, assuming a dominant position in the Party, government, military,
and economic and cultural spheres and forming a bureaucratic monopoly
bourgeoisie which controls the whole state machinery and social wealth.
This new bureaucratic monopoly bourgeoisie used the state power under
its control to transform socialist ownership into ownership by those
taking the capitalist road and to transform the socialist economy into a
capitalist economy and a state monopoly capitalist economy.

The nature of a society 's economy cannot be determined by its label,
but by the ownership of the means of production. In other words, it must
be determined by who owns the means of production, who allocates it, and
whom it serves. After the renegade clique of Khrushchev and Brezhnev
usurped Party and government power in the Soviet Union, it exercised
total control over political and economic power and pursued a thoroughly
revisionist line in the economic sphere. It extolled the "ruble as a
measure of labor merit" and "the ability to earn a profit as the best
criterion for evaluating Communist Party members in charge of operations
and management." Under the support of the Soviet revisionist renegade
clique, Liber man, an economist of revisionism, proposed a scheme of
state enterprise management that relied on profit and material
incentives, and the "experiment" was widely disseminated. Since Brezhnev
succeeded Khrushchev, the "new economic system" has been instituted
nationwide. The profit principle of capitalism has been legally affirmed
to strengthen the exploitation of the laboring people by the
bureaucratic monopolist oligarchy. With these "transformations," the
means of production which formerly belonged to the people of the Soviet
Union are now owned by and at the service of the new bureaucratic
monopoly bourgeoisie. The worker and peasant of the Soviet Union have
been deprived of their means of production and reduced once more to
hired laborers. Although the Soviet Union may still carry the socialist
label, the original socialist ownership system has in fact been
transformed into an ownership system of the bureaucratic monopoly
bourgeoisie.

In socialist society, the state-operated economy based on
socialist state ownership is a leading element in the national economy.
Once the revisionist renegade clique usurps the leadership of the
socialist economy, it is naturally transformed into a state monopoly
capitalist economy. This is because the more productive forces the new
bureaucratic monopoly bourgeoisie puts under state ownership
representing its interests, the more it can control the whole society's
wealth in the name of the "state." This way, it not only can continue
using the state label to deceive the laboring people, but through state
capitalism can also tightly control the national economy. Therefore, the
outstanding characteristic of the Soviet Union's capitalist economy is
that state monopoly capitalism controls and commands everything. This
situation is rare in the capital imperialist country. In the capital
imperialist country, although state monopoly capitalism has undergone
sizable development, it has not yet reached the state which prevails in
the Soviet Union. Because of exploitation and oppression, the Soviet
working class, especially the mass of laboring people, has suffered
heavily. Lenin once pointed out: "Under private ownership of the means
of production, more monopolization and nationalization will inevitably
lead to greater exploitation and oppression of the laboring masses and
to greater difficulties in staging revolts. Similarly, any strengthening
of the reactionary military dictatorship will inevitably result in
raising the capitalist profits exploited from other classes and in
inflicting decades of suffering on the working class who will have to
pay the capitalists for the billions of dollars which the military
dictatorship has borrowed."
<a id="2">[[2]](#bot_2)</a>

As we read this passage by Lenin, it sounds like an accurate economic
analysis of Soviet state capitalism. Nekarsov, a well-known Russian
poet, denounced in grief and anger the black rule of the old czar, "In
Russia, who can be happy or free?" Today in Russia, the children of the
heroes of the October Revolution are suffering multiple hardship with no
joy or freedom to speak of. But the bureaucratic monopoly bourgeoisie
headed by Brezhnev plunder the state treasury, lead extravagant lives,
exercise cruel and arbitrary rule, and suck the blood and
sweat of the people of the Soviet Union at will. The bureaucratic
monopoly bourgeoisie headed by Brezhnev is the class basis of social
imperialism and a "personification" of state capitalism.

### _The Trust Is the Basic Form of the Monopoly Organization of Soviet Revisionism_

An important form of organization in the state capitalism of Soviet
revisionism is the "trust." The ways in which trusts are established
differ from the monopoly organization of capitalist countries. They are
formed by merging the big enterprises with many medium and small
enterprises through the use of state coercion.

The trust as a form of monopoly organization developed rapidly in the
Soviet Union. In 1961, there were only 2 such trusts. Ten years later,
in June 1971, there were 1,400 such trusts with more than 14,000
enterprises and 7.7 million employees. Nearly one-third of the mining
enterprises were trusts. At the "Twenty-fourth National Congress" of the
Soviet Union, Brezhnev exclaimed, "The policy to establish trusts and
merged enterprises must be carried out more resolutely --- in the
future, they should become the basic economic accounting unit in social
production." Following the order of the Soviet revisionist leadership
group, since 1971 the trust system has extended its sphere of dominance
to include all the Soviet Union's manufacturing sectors.

There are three basic types of Soviet revisionist trusts:

First, the absorbed enterprises 'lose their independence and status as
legal persons." The trust becomes "the basic economic accounting unit of
social production" and possesses all the rights over its subordinate
enterprises.

Second, some absorbed enterprises lose their legal independence, while
others "maintain relative independence."

Third, the absorbed enterprises are "still independent," but are
administered by the trust.

Of the above three types of trusts, Soviet revisionism emphasized
the development of the first type. It was modeled after
that of Western monopoly capitalist enterprises and "used" their
"organization system chart." Soviet revisionism publicized the trust as
"embodying a compressed and dormant future structure of Russian
industries" and as being a type of "special Russian consortium." The
trust not only engages in production, but also deals with the supply of
raw materials and the distribution of products. The difference between
the trust and the Western monopoly capitalist enterprise is that the
alliance between the Russian trust and state power is much closer. It is
not only a basic economic accounting unit, it also carries out part of
the functions originally exercised by the General Control Bureau or even
the Ministry of Control with respect to planning, production, supply,
and distribution. Large and regional trusts are "not only an integrated
production unit but also an economic management organ." There are no
middle organs between the various ministries in charge of economic
control and the trusts. The managers of the trust, like the secretaries
and deputy secretaries of government ministries, are listed as 'leading
members of the national economy" of Soviet revisionism. They are
important members of the bureaucratic monopoly bourgeoisie headed by
Brezhnev. Therefore, the trust is an entity that unifies the state organ
and the monopoly organization and is an important form in the
administrative system of state monopoly capitalism.

Apart from the fact that the trust is a monopoly organization, the state
enterprise of Soviet revisionism has long been capitalistic. In the
state enterprise of Soviet revisionism, the working masses have long
been reduced from being the masters of the enterprise to slaves of the
bureaucratic monopoly bourgeoisie. The leaders of the enterprise are the
agents of the leadership group of Soviet revisionism. According to the
codes of the "Regulations of Socialist State Production Enterprises,"
the manager of the enterprise exercises the "power to recruit and
dismiss personnel and makes decisions regarding rewards and punishment
for the enterprise's personnel." He has the authority to determine the
wages and bonuses of the staff and workers and to resell or
rent the enterprise's means of production. In sum, even without the
trust, the manager and the plant director are already rulers possessing
all the power in state enterprises, and the broad masses of workers are
already slaves of the bureaucratic monopoly bourgeoisie. Now, with the
trust as a monopoly organization, the bureaucratic monopoly bourgeoisie
can further strengthen its control over the pulse of the national
economy in the Soviet Union. This new-style big bourgeoisie, using the
state enterprises and trusts it controls and availing itself of the name
of the state, has used taxation and surrendered profits to
unrestrainedly plunder the fruits of the Russian worker's labor in order
to support the extravagant lives of a few monopoly capitalists, suppress
the Soviet people, launch aggression, and pursue its social imperialist
policy.

While the renegade clique of Brezhnev was developing monopoly
organizations in manufacturing and mining in a big way, various types of
monopoly organizations were also developed in agriculture. They
included: (1) the agricultural trust which is a trust organization of
specialized state farms such as the poultry, livestock, and vegetable
trusts; (2) the agricultural trust which is an organization of several
state farms or collective farms or between state farms and collective
farms; and (3) the agricultural-industrial complex, also called the
agricultural-industrial joint enterprise which is a trust by which the
agricultural enterprise directly operates processing plants for
agricultural produce. Through these agricultural monopoly organizations,
the bureaucratic monopoly bourgeoisie strengthened their control and
plundered the broad Soviet countryside.

### _The "Shchekino Experiment" Was the Model of the Oppressive System Implemented by Soviet Revisionist Monopoly Enterprise_

The neomonopoly capitalist bureaucrats, having put the national economy
under their control and totally restored the capitalist hired-labor
system, stepped up their exploitation and oppression of the broad
masses. Since 1967, the so-called "Shchekino experiment"
has amply confirmed the restoration of capitalism in the Soviet Union.

Shchekino was a chemical enterprise located near Moscow which had more
than 7,000 employees and produced chemical fertilizers and other
chemical products. In August 1967, tailored to the demands of the Soviet
revisionist bureaucratic monopoly bourgeoisie, the enterprise began a
so-called "economic experiment to strengthen the employees' concern for
increasing production, raise labor productivity, and reduce the number
of personnel." This "experiment" continuously increased the workers'
labor intensity through the measures of concurrent jobs, combined
categories of work, and expanded scopes of service and achieved the goal
of reducing personnel and raising labor intensity. At the same time, it
was decided to freeze the enterprise's total wage fund for several
years, and the wage fund thus saved by personnel retrenchment was left
largely to the discretion of a handful of the privileged class in the
enterprise. Brezhnev boasted that the "experiment" was a perfect
remuneration model, and it has since been disseminated throughout the
Soviet Union.

The heart of the "Shchekino experiment" is to "reduce the labor force to
increase labor productivity" in order to push the enterprise to "tap its
potential." How was labor productivity increased? The "Shchekino
experiment" proved that it could be achieved by increasing labor
intensity. According to the statistics of June 1971, since the Shchekino
chemical joint enterprise implemented this "experiment," more than 1,000
workers had been dismissed, or more than one-seventh of the total staff
and workers. Of these, 68 workers, or 6 percent, were dismissed due to
either greater mechanization or the consequent reduction in labor
intensity; while more than 90 percent of the workers were dismissed
because of an increase in labor intensity. Marx pointed out, "The
crucial problem of the whole capitalist production system is: to
increase uncompensated labor through such measures as prolonging the
workday, increasing productivity, and consequently making labor power
more intense."
<a id="3">[[3]](#bot_3)</a> In the
imperialist stage, the extraction of unpaid labor from the worker by
monopoly capital was increased by a hundred times. In capital
imperialist countries, monopoly capital used so-called "scientific
management methods" such as the "Taylor system" to force the worker to
increase labor intensity by a big margin in order to increase the
extraction of surplus value. The "Shchekino experiment" promoted by the
renegade clique of Soviet revisionism was a carbon copy of the "Taylor
system" which was strongly denounced by Lenin as a "blood- and
sweat-sucking system." Its intent was to force one Russian to do several
workers' jobs and maliciously extract more surplus labor and surplus
value from him.

As of July 1971, the 121 enterprises which implemented the "Shchekino
experiment" had already dismissed 65,000 people. At present, heavy
unemployment has begun to emerge in the Soviet Union. This economic
system of state monopoly capitalism of Soviet revisionism has already
pushed the relationship between capital and hired labor to its limit. It
has already met, and will continue to encounter, strong opposition from
the Soviet working class and the broad masses of laboring people.

[Soviet Revisionist "New International Relations" Is Another Name for Neocolonialism](#)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _Economic Unification Is a Major Measure of the Neocolonialism Launched by Soviet Revisionism_

To pursue high monopoly profits, monopoly capital, while increasing
exploitation of the people at home, inevitably expands externally.
Through capital export and by adopting colonial policies, it plunders
and enslaves the people of other countries. The monopoly capitalism of
Soviet revisionism naturally is not satisfied with the exploitation of
the Soviet workers and peasant masses and inevitably extends its paws to
foreign countries. The first to be so affected are the "fraternal
countries" of that "big socialist family."

The renegade clique of Brezhnev trapped some Eastern European countries
and Mongolia into a so-called "big socialist family." The
nominal relations between Soviet revisionism and the "fraternal
countries" of this big family are "new socialist international
relations." Actually, it is a cat and mouse relationship between the
imperialist suzerain and the colonies. The Soviet Union resorted to the
most brutal and vicious means to tightly control these countries.
Militarily, it stationed sizable armed forces in some countries in line
with the 'Warsaw Pact" and other bilateral agreements. It even openly
mobilized several hundred thousand troops to invade Czechoslovakia.
Politically, it bribed, sabotaged, and even used bayonets to set up
puppet governments. Economically, it pushed the so-called "economic
unification" through the "Council for Mutual Economic Aid" (COMECON).
Some Eastern European countries and Mongolia are virtually under
colonial rule and suffer shocking exploitation.

The intent of the "economic unification" promoted by the social
imperialism of Soviet revisionism is to dissolve the national economic
systems of COMECON members, create a monolithic, lopsided colonial
economy, and "unify" the territories, populations, and resources of
these countries with the social imperialism of Soviet revisionism.
Soviet revisionism's "international division of labor" and "production
specialization" are both subject to "economic unification," serving the
purpose of realizing the above-mentioned "economic unification."

One of the means used by Soviet revisionism to enslave the "fraternal
countries" in the name of "economic unification" is to destroy the fuel
and raw material industries of the COMECON member countries and to
achieve a high degree of monopoly by Soviet revisionism. According to
statistics released by COMECON and official Soviet revisionist sources,
in the 1966-1970 period, the percentages of imported fuel and raw
materials going from the Soviet revisionists to Bulgaria, Hungary, the
German Democratic Republic, Poland, and Czechoslovakia were: 93 percent
for petroleum, 61.9 percent for coal, 86.8 percent for iron ore, 97.5
percent for pig iron, and 64.3 percent for raw cotton. The high degree
of monopoly by the Soviet revisionists in the supply of fuel and raw
materials to the member countries determined the fate of
these countries.

Another means used by Soviet revisionism to enslave the "fraternal
countries" in the name of "economic unification" was to force the member
countries to specialize in products required by the Soviet revisionists.
For example, Poland was forced to develop the shipbuilding industry,
Czechoslovakia to specialize in railway rolling stock, the German
Democratic Republic to produce mining equipment, Bulgaria to produce
vegetables and fruits, and Mongolia to specialize in the livestock
industry to provide meat for the Soviet revisionists. This way, the
"fraternal countries" were transformed into affiliated processing
plants, orchards and vegetable gardens, and livestock ranches for Soviet
revisionism.

To accelerate "economic unification" and more effectively control the
member countries, Soviet revisionism set up a series of "supranational
organizations" such as the "International Metallurgical Industry
Cooperative Organization," the "International Chemical Engineering
Industry Cooperative Organization," the "International Economic
Cooperative Bank," and the "International Investment Bank." These
"supranational organizations" are actually international monopoly
organizations controlled by the state monopoly capitalism of Soviet
revisionism. Through them, the vital departments of the national
economies of the member countries are controlled by Soviet revisionism.

When Soviet revisionism had its hands at the throats of the "fraternal
countries," coercing them to lopsidedly develop their economies in
conformity with Soviet needs, it could plunder them through trade using
monopoly and colonial rules. According to Soviet revisionist magazines,
in 1970 Soviet revisionism accounted for 80 percent of Mongolia's total
foreign trade, more than 50 percent of Bulgaria's, about 40 percent of
that of the German Democratic Republic's, and about one-third of
Poland's, Hungary's, and Czechoslovakia's. Taking advantage of its
dominant position, Soviet revisionism has cruelly exploited these
countries by trading with them on terms unfavorable to them. The Soviet
Union traded Mongolia one bicycle for four horses and one toy lamb for
one live lamb. The Soviet import price for electric
locomotives from Czechoslovakia was two fifths lower than the import
price of the same item from West Germany. But the export price of iron
ore from the Soviet revisionists to Czechoslovakia was more than twice
as high as that to West Germany. The atomic reactors sold by Soviet
revisionism to some Eastern European countries were at a price four
times higher than in the international market. A former member of the
Planning Commission of the German Democratic Republic complained that
the annual loss suffered by his country from trading with the Soviet
Union amounted to 2 billion marks.

Like capital imperialism, the social imperialism of Soviet revisionism
exported capital to some Eastern European countries and Mongolia calling
it "aid." Up to early 1971, Soviet revisionism exported capital totaling
2.15 billion rubles as longterm 'loans." Through capital export, not
only were large sums of money extracted in the form of interest, but the
direction of development in the recipient countries was also controlled.
Moreover, availing themselves of this exporting, they dumped large
quantities of unmarketable commodities and equipment at high prices to
obtain high monopoly profits.

While exporting capital, the Soviet revisionists, taking advantage of
their predominate position in "economic unification" and under the
pretext of the increasing demands by member countries for Soviet exports
of raw materials, compelled some countries to provide the funds and
manpower for the construction of Soviet plants and the exploration of
Soviet mines. They engaged in naked plundering. For example, in 1966
Czechoslovakia was forced to furnish 500 million rubles to the Soviet
revisionists for the purpose of buying steel pipes and petroleum
equipment to develop the Tuimen oilfield. In 1968, Czechoslovakia was
again forced to furnish large quantities of trucks and large caliber
piping to construct a pipeline for Siberian natural gas. Soviet
revisionism even drafted several tens of thousands of laborers from
Bulgaria to do hard labor, thus directly exploiting their surplus labor.

Lenin once denounced the old czar as "treating his neighboring
countries according to the principle of prerogative under
serfdom." <a id="4">[[4]](#bot_4)</a> The
conduct of Soviet revisionism toward its neighboring countries today is
even worse than that of the old czar. The so-called "international
division of labor" and "production specialization" in the service of
Soviet revisionist "economic unification" is a "division of labor"
between the suzerain and its colonies like the one advocated by the old
Japanese militarism under the slogan of "industrial Japan, agricultural
China." The "big socialist family" of Soviet revisionism is merely a
different name for an imperialist sphere of influence like the "new
European order" of Hitler's Germany and Japanese militarism's "East
Asian Great Co-Prosperity Sphere."
<a id="4">[[4]](#bot_4)</a>

### _Carrying out a Colonial Expansion Policy in Asia, Africa, and Latin America under the Name of "Aid"_

Because Soviet revisionism has transformed into social imperialism, it
must also be subject to the laws governing imperialism. It naturally is
not satisfied with colonial rule within the "big socialist family," but
inevitably tries to monopolize more of the world's markets for its
commodities, raw materials, and investment. Asia, Africa, and Latin
America, with abundant resources and backward economies, have been the
natural objects of Soviet revisionist colonial expansion.

The renegade clique of Soviet revisionism says it offers "aid" to Asia,
Africa, and Latin America. But in fact, under the guise of "aid," it
attempts in every way to bring some countries of these regions into its
own sphere of influence and to struggle with United States imperialism
to win over the third countries.

"Soviet aid" is a trojan horse which breaks its way into the "aid"
recipient countries on all sides, carrying harsh political and economic
conditions. It consists mainly of "military aid," namely, the sale of
outdated military hardware. By this means, it controls and interferes
with the "aid" recipient countries militarily, politically, and
economically. Soviet revisionism annually gives one billion rubles in
aid to regions in Asia, Africa, and Latin America: 30
percent as "economic aid" and 70 percent as "military aid." The key
areas are the Middle East and the Persian Gulf area; next in line is the
South Asian subcontinent. Because the Middle East and the Persian Gulf
areas possess immense strategic value and are rich in oil, Soviet
revisionism tries very hard in many countries in these areas to
establish naval and air bases, control the prospecting, extracting,
refining, and transportation of oil, and monopolize the purchase of oil
through "Soviet aid." The South Asian subcontinent possesses not only
important strategic value but also abundant natural and human resources.
Soviet revisionism has plundered the resources of these areas and
interfered with their politics (through exports of military hardware and
capital at unfavorable terms of trade) while waiting for favorable
opportunities to establish military bases.

In the South Asian subcontinent, India has received the largest share of
"Soviet aid." Her economic pulse has been in the hands of Soviet
revisionism. As of the end of 1970, the percentages of Indian industrial
production coming from enterprises receiving Soviet "aid" were as
follows: 30 percent of its steel output, 60 percent of its oil refining
capacity, 85 percent of its heavy machines, 20 percent of its
electricity output, 30 percent of its oil products, and 60 percent of
its electricity-generating equipment. In the "aid assisted" projects,
engineering designs were monopolized and totally controlled during the
construction phase by Soviet revisionism. Even in operation, it was
still impossible for India to be independent of the control of Soviet
revisionism. For the maintenance of equipment and the supply of parts
and important materials, it had to rely on the Soviet revisionists. In
addition, Soviet revisionism further controlled India's production by
demanding that "Soviet aid" be repaid in kind. Some of India's leather
shoe factories, garment factories, dye factories, leather factories, and
light bulb factories were set up to meet the Soviet Union's demand. The
output of these plants was not for India's consumption, but for export
to the Soviet Union to repay debts. It was in these ways that Soviet
revisionism sought to take advantage of India's raw materials and cheap
labor and turn India into its affiliated processing plant
under the guise of "aid." The Indian press exclaimed, "India is an egg
that sits snugly in the Russian basket."

The renegade clique of Soviet revisionism boasts that only by relying on
Soviet "aid" and entering into "international division of labor" "can
the developing countries smoothly attain real political and economic
independence and be capable of resisting imperialist power." This is
indeed the greatest lie ever heard. Even Soviet revisionism had to admit
that the division of labor between her and the developing countries was
"strongly affected by the preexisting division of labor." Its
characteristic is "the exchange of industrial products, especially
machinery for raw materials, tropical produce and fuel." Over 95 percent
of the Soviet revisionists' imports of rubber and 92 percent of their
imports of cotton come from Asia, Africa, and Latin America. The Soviet
revisionists trade their outdated machinery for oil from the Middle
East, copper from Chile, tin from Bolivia, meat from East Africa, and
uranium from Somalia. Is it not true that this pattern of "international
division of labor" between the "industrial Soviet Union" and
"agricultural Asia, Africa, and Latin America" is typical of the
division of labor between a suzerain and its colonies?

The renegade clique of Soviet revisionism boasts that the interest on
its loans, 2.5 percent per annum, is much lower than that charged by the
capital imperialist countries and that the loans are "selfless aid." In
fact, Soviet revisionist loans are a disguised form of usury. The
usurious interest rate was concealed in the high prices charged for
goods supplied. The Soviet loans extended to the countries of Asia,
Africa, and Latin America had to be used for purchasing Soviet goods,
consisting primarily of outdated weapons, old equipment, and
unmarketable commodities. Not only were the products poor in quality and
backward in technology, but they were also higher in price, some 20
percent, 30 percent, or even 100 percent higher than the prices on the
international market. In addition, the Soviet revisionist social
imperialists often pressed the debtor countries for payment, compelling
them to supply the Soviet Union with certain raw materials.
It was reported that the Soviet Union had signed an agreement with a
Middle Eastern country demanding that the latter pay its debts to the
former in oil from 1973 through 1980 at prices 20 percent below the
international market price. What is labeled as "selfless aid" is in fact
cruel exploitation.

Verbally, the renegade clique of the Soviet revisionists have promised
"total support" for the revolutionary struggles of the peoples in Asia,
Africa, and Latin America. In actuality, they have colluded with all the
world's most reactionary powers to undermine the revolutionary struggles
of these peoples and have pursued neocolonialism. They have supplied
money and arms to help the reactionary groups of various countries
massacre revolutionaries. They have dismembered Pakistan, supported the
traitor clique of Lon Nol, engaged in sabotage in many countries of
Asia, Africa, and Latin America, used all means to support the
reactionary groups of various countries in Asia, Africa, and Latin
America in order to extinguish the people's armed struggle, suppressed
national liberation movements, and acted as the military police of the
world.

[Soviet Revisionist Imperialism Is the Eve of a Second October Revolution](#)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _The Extreme Parasitic and Decaying Nature of Soviet Revisionist Social Imperialism_

Soviet revisionist social imperialism is monopoly capitalism. It cruelly
exploits and oppresses its laboring people and ferociously plunders and
enslaves the peoples of other countries, especially the broad masses in
Asia, Africa, and Latin America. It is even worse than capital
imperialism. However, like all imperialism, Soviet revisionist state
monopoly capitalism is just a paper tiger. Because all monopoly
capitalism is necessarily at the same time both parasitic and decaying
capitalism, it is moribund capitalism. Soviet revisionist state monopoly
capitalism is no exception. Whether in its economic or political
aspects, Soviet revisionist state monopoly capitalism
reveals in every possible way its extreme parasitic and decaying nature.
It will soon be sent to a museum by the people of the Soviet Union and
the world.

The extreme decaying nature of Soviet revisionist social imperialism has
been primarily revealed in its stagnating economic development. The
production relation of Soviet revisionist state monopoly capitalism
seriously hinders the development of social productive forces. When the
Soviet Union was a socialist country, its industrial production in the
ten-year period of 1929-1938 increased by leaps and bounds at an average
annual rate of 17.4 percent. When the Soviet Union turned to social
imperialism, the average annual growth rate of industrial production in
the ten-year period of 1961-1970 declined sharply from 8.6 percent to
7.7 percent in 1971 and below 7 percent in 1972. Under the rule of the
renegade clique of Khrushchev and Brezhnev, agricultural production in
the Soviet Union was even worse. Serious agricultural crises erupted
many times and large quantities of food had to be imported from the
United States, Canada, and Australia. Owing to industrial recession,
declining agricultural output, dwindling livestock, and inflation,
severe shortages of commodities and tight market supplies were reported.
The livelihood of the laboring people was impoverished.

The extreme decaying nature of social imperialism has also been revealed
in its frantic efforts at military expansion and war preparations. To
pursue external aggression and expansion, the bureaucratic monopoly
bourgeoisie represented by the Brezhnev renegade clique has inevitably
followed the Hitler-type policy of "more guns and less butter" to
militarize the national economy. According to estimates, the military
expenditures of the Soviet revisionists were three to four times higher
than those admitted by official sources. The average annual military
expenditure since the 1970s has reached 80 billion dollars, or more than
30 percent of the state budget. To fight for naval supremacy, Soviet
revisionism has greatly expanded its navy. Military expenditure on
battleships has increased sharply year after year. According to
estimates, the annual average expenditure in this area in
the 1960s was 2 billion dollars. In 1970, it was increased to 3 billion
dollars, or 0.9 billion dollars more than the United States spent on
battleships in the same year. When large quantities of social wealth are
not used to expand production to improve people's livelihood, but
instead to expand armaments, prepare for wars, and pursue external
aggression and expansion, it constitutes the most pronounced
manifestation of social imperialism's decaying nature.

The extreme decaying nature of Soviet revisionist social imperialism has
also been revealed in its total political reaction and serious
deterioration of social life. Chairman Mao pointed out that "the present
Soviet Union is a dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, a dictatorship of the
big bourgeoisie, a German fasciststyle dictatorship, a Hitler-type
dictatorship." <a id="5">[[5]](#bot_5)</a>
Chairman Mao's analysis profoundly revealed the class nature and social
origin of Soviet revisionist social imperialism, exposing its fascist
nature and the lie of the Soviet revisionist renegade clique that the
Soviet Union is "a country for all the people." When the Soviet
revisionist renegade clique came to power, it tried very hard to
strengthen its fascist dictatorship organ. It not only used the most
modern scientific and technological means to equip its police and
intelligence agencies to strengthen its suppression of the people, but
also widely stationed secret agents in factories, farms, organizations,
and associations to keep the masses in line. Today's Soviet Union is
under a reign of white terror. Whoever dares to show discontent and
resist the Brezhnev clique is watched, tailed, interrogated, or sent to
a "mental asylum," concentration camp, or prison for the alleged crime
of "slandering the Soviet Union or sabotaging the social order."

In addition to suppressing the people with naked violence, the renegade
clique of Brezhnev has also used subtle measures to undermine the people
by introducing the rotten culture, vulgar arts, and life-style from
capital imperialist countries to poison the Soviet people. All the most
ideologically backward, reactionary, and rotten things in the world have
managed to find fertile soil in Soviet revisionist social imperialism.

Another manifestation of the extreme parasitic and decaying
nature of Soviet revisionist social imperialism has been the much higher
income of the bureaucratic monopoly bourgeoisie represented by the
Brezhnev renegade clique than that received by the ordinary workers and
peasants. The difference in income of more than 10 times, or even 100
times, was obtained through high wages, high bonuses, and various types
of personal subsidies. This class has also taken advantage of its
special economic and political privileges to serve its own selfish
interests, engaging in corruption and leading extravagant, parasitic
lives. Closely related to this bureaucratic monopoly bourgeoisie is a
revisionist intellectual aristocracy. This revisionist intellectual
aristocracy serves the bureaucratic monopoly bourgeoisie in the
ideological sphere and leads an equally sensual, parasitic life.
Sholokhov, an author known for his writing on the terror of war and
bourgeois pacifism, became a billionaire. He owned not only a private
car, but also a private airplane. His bank deposits were so huge that
even he himself lost track of them.

In sum, a rotten atmosphere characteristic of a decaying social system
has pervaded the economic, political, and cultural spheres of Soviet
revisionist social imperialism. This social system, like the poisonous
fungus growing on a pile of cow dung, is devoid of vitality.

### _A New Historical Period of Opposing United States Imperialism and Soviet Revisionism Has Already Begun_

The bloodstained oppression and exploitation of the laboring people at
home, the cruel colonial rule over countries in the "big socialist
family," and the aggressive expansion in various parts of the world have
inevitably intensified the various contradictions which Soviet
revisionist social imperialism faces at home and abroad.

Wherever there is oppression, there is resistance. The oppression and
exploitation of the laboring people of the Soviet Union by the Soviet
revisionist bureaucratic monopoly bourgeoisie inevitably
meets the resistance of the Soviet laboring people.

The opposition of the Soviet people to the bureaucratic monopoly
bourgeoisie takes many varied forms. The workers of many areas in the
Soviet Union have resorted to slowdowns, negligence of duty, and strikes
to show their discontent and opposition to the ruling clique of Soviet
revisionism. In many places, the revolutionary masses have demonstrated
many times, opposing the fascist dictatorship of Soviet revisionist
authority. In various areas of the Soviet Union, people have frequently
published underground materials, distributed leaflets to protest the
reactionary mile of the Soviet revisionist renegade clique, and exposed
the hidden secrets of the Soviet revisionist privileged class. The
heroic children of the October Revolution will never submit to the
reactionary rule of the new czar of Soviet revisionism. Under the dark
rule of the old czar, Lenin confidently pointed out that "the
proletariat of Russia will spare no sacrifice to free the whole of
mankind from the humiliation of the czarist monarchy."
<a id="6">[[6]](#bot_6)</a> Today, the Soviet
proletariat, peasants, and revolutionary intellectuals must answer
Lenin's call and work for the overthrow of the new czar and the
reestablishment of proletarian dictatorship.

Second, the contradiction between the countries and people being
persecuted by Soviet revisionist neocolonialism and Soviet revisionist
social imperialism has increasingly intensified.

The neocolonialist policy of "economic unification" pursued by Soviet
revisionism and the enslavement and plundering of some Eastern European
countries and Mongolia has furthered the development of antiplundering
and antidomination struggles in these countries. The flagrant armed
occupation of Czechoslovakia by the Soviet revisionists opened up the
watchful eyes of some Eastern European countries and Mongolia and
strengthened their struggle against Soviet revisionist social
imperialism. Today, Eastern Europe is like a powder keg which may
explode at some future date. The invasion of Prague by Soviet
revisionist tanks did not demonstrate the might of the Soviet
revisionist social imperialism; on the contrary, it was an omen
of the beginning of the Soviet revisionist colonial
empire's collapse.

Under the guise of "aid," Soviet revisionism frantically infiltrates,
plunders, and invades the countries of Asia, Africa, and Latin America
and sets itself in opposition to the people of Asia, Africa, and Latin
America. The demonic paws of Soviet revisionist social imperialism have
reached some countries in the Mediterranean and the Indian Ocean by
establishing military bases, obtaining port privileges, and controlling
and interfering with internal politics and foreign affairs. The Soviet
fishing fleet cruises freely around the world, plundering and destroying
fishing resources and encroaching on the territorial waters of other
countries. The people of Asia, Africa, and Latin America are becoming
more aware of the reactionary nature of Soviet revisionist social
imperialism. They have solemnly pointed out that the Soviet revisionist
renegade clique, which has betrayed "the world's revolutionary peoples,"
is a "neocolonialist" and "another public enemy of the people of the
world." The countries and people who are subject to aggression, control,
interference, and ill-treatment from Soviet revisionism and United
States imperialism are uniting to victoriously launch an
anti-imperialist and anticolonial struggle aimed particularly at the two
nuclear superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union.

Third, the frantic external aggression and expansion of Soviet
revisionist social imperialism and its fight for commodity markets,
supplies of raw materials, and investment outlets has intensified the
contradictions among the imperialist countries to an unprecedented
degree, especially those between Soviet revisionism and United States
imperialism; the two nuclear super powers wrestle for world hegemony.

Today, it is primarily the two nuclear superpowers, the United States
and the Soviet Union, who are vying for world hegemony. The strategic
point they are fighting for is in Europe because Europe is the heart of
the capitalist world. The West always wants to push Soviet revisionism
to expand eastward and divert this flood of disaster to China. But China
is a tough piece of meat that has been resisting biting for
many years. At present, Soviet revisionism, pursuing the strategy of
feint attack, has stepped up its struggle in Europe. The Soviet
revisionists have stationed two-thirds of their army and air force to
the west of the Urals. The Soviet revisionist navy has expanded rapidly
in the recent decade. In 1970, it dispatched more than 200 battleships
to three oceans and eight seacoasts in a global exercise to show off its
naval prowess and stepped up its expansion toward the Mediterranean and
the Indian Ocean. The struggle for world hegemony between the United
States and the Soviet Union is the source of world unrest. The struggle
has encountered intense resistance from the Third World and created
increasing displeasure in Japan and the West European countries. The
expanding internal and external difficulties of the two powers put them
in an increasingly unenviable and helpless situation.

Imperialism means aggression and war. Soviet revisionist social
imperialism is stationing troops along China's borders, attempting to
turn China into its colony. We must follow Chairman Mao's teachings to
"be prepared for war, be prepared for natural disasters, and do
everything for the people" and to "dig deep caves, increase grain
stocks, and never be aggressive" in order to strengthen preparations
against aggressive wars and be on the alert for the outbreak of an
imperialist world war, especially surprise attacks from Soviet
revisionist social imperialism. We must resolutely, thoroughly, cleanly,
and totally annihilate all enemies who dare to invade us.

Chairman Mao pointed out, "The revolutionary people of the world will
never forgive the numerous evil and scandalous deeds committed by Soviet
revisionism in collusion with United States imperialism. The peoples of
various countries are standing up. A new era opposing United States
imperialism and Soviet revisionism is dawning."
<a id="7">[[7]](#bot_7)</a> In the
struggle against the hegemony mentality and power politics, the Third
World is awakening and growing. This is a big event in contemporary
international relations. The characteristic of the contemporary
international situation is perpetual chaos. "Strong winds foretell the
coming storm." This is precisely the contemporary version of the world's
basic contradictions which Lenin analyzed. All countries subject to
aggression, sabotage, interference, control, and ill-treatment from
imperialism have become increasingly united, forming a broad united
front and strengthening their struggle against imperialism and new and
old colonialism, especially against the hegemony mentality of the two
superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union. Countries must be
independent, nations must be liberated, and people must make revolution.
These are irresistible historical tides which will sweep away the United
States and the Soviet Union.

On the eve of the victory of the Anti-Japanese War, Chairman Mao
prophesied: "The world will advance and never regress. Naturally,
however, we should be prepared to anticipate possible temporary, and
even serious, historical detours. There are still very strong
reactionary influences in many countries that are reluctant to see their
own people and peoples of other countries achieve unity, progress, and
liberation. Whoever ignores these factors will surely commit serious
political errors. However, the general tendency of history has been
determined and cannot be changed."
<a id="8">[[8]](#bot_8)</a> The
presence of Soviet revisionist social imperialism is a temporary
historical detour. But, like capital imperialism, it is weighed down by
all sorts of contradictions: The contradiction between the Soviet
revisionist bureaucratic monopoly bourgeoisie, on the one hand, and the
proletariat and all the laboring people of the Soviet Union, on the
other; the contradiction between Soviet revisionist social imperialism
and the people of the colonies and the whole world; and the
contradiction between Soviet revisionist social imperialism and capital
imperialism, especially United States imperialism. All of these are
becoming increasingly acute. Because of the existence and development of
these contradictions, Soviet revisionist social imperialism will surely
be discarded in the museum of history by the people of the Soviet Union
and the world. Lenin asserted, 'Imperialism is the eve of socialist
revolution." <a id="9">[[9]](#bot_9)</a>
Soviet revisionist social imperialism is the eve of a second socialist
October Revolution. Chairman Mao pointed out: "The Soviet Union is a
socialist country and the Communist Party of the Soviet Union was
created by Lenin. Although the leadership of the Party and government of
the Soviet Union is now usurped by revisionists, I would advise our
comrades to firmly believe that the broad Soviet people, Party members,
and cadres are good people and want revolution. Revisionist rule will
not last long." <a id="10">[[10]](#bot_10)</a>
Under the great banner of Leninism and with the support of the people of
the world, the Soviet people, who have a glorious revolutionary
tradition, will eventually bury Soviet revisionist social capitalism.
Their success will once again allow the brilliance of proletarian
dictatorship, socialism, and Marxism-Leninism to shine over the land of
the Soviet Union.

Let the ruling class tremble before the communist revolution. The
proletarians have nothing to lose but their chains. They have a world to
win.

Workingmen of all countries, unite! <a id="11">[[11]](#bot_11)</a>

### _Major Study References_

Lenin, "On the Task of the Third International," _Complete Works of
Lenin_, Vol. 29.

Chairman Mao, "Talk with American Correspondent Anna Louise Strong."

Chairman Mao, "A Congratulatory Telegram to the Fifth Congress of the
Labor Party of Albania," October 25, 1966.

### _Review Problems_

1\. How does one recognize the nature of Soviet revisionist social
imperialism from the basic economic characteristics of imperialism?

2\. Why will the rule of the Brezhnev renegade clique in the Soviet Union
not be long?

_Notes_
--------------------------------

<a id="bot_s_a">[\*](#s_a)</a> Su-lien she-hui ti-kuo-chu-i ts'an-chia
shih-chieh ti-kuo-chu-i hsing-lieh --- she-hui ti-kuo-chu-i shih
k'ou-t'ou shang ti she-hui-chu-i shih-chi shang ti ti-kuo-chu-i.

<a id="bot_1">[[1]](#1)</a> _Imperialism, the Highest Stage of
Capitalism_, _Selected Works of Lenin_, Vol. 2,
Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 827.

<a id="bot_2">[[2]](#2)</a> "Resolutions on the Present Situation.
Seventh National Congressional Conference (April Congressional
Conference) of the Social Democratic Labor Party (Bolshevik) of Russia,"
_Complete Works of Lenin_, Vol. 24, p. 277.

<a id="bot_3">[[3]](#3)</a> Marx, _Critique of the Gotha
Program_, _Selected Works of Marx and Engels_,
Vol. 3, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 17.

<a id="bot_4">[[4]](#4)</a> "On the National Superiority Complex of the
Great Russian People," _Selected Works of Lenin_, Vol. 2,
Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 611.

<a id="bot_5">[[5]](#5)</a> A Talk by Chairman Mao on May 11, 1964.
Quoted in _Jen-min jih-pao_ _(People's Daily)_, April 22,
1970.

<a id="bot_6">[[6]](#6)</a> "War and Russia's Social Democratic Party,"
Complete Works of Lenin, Vol. 21, p. 13.

<a id="bot_7">[[7]](#7)</a> Quoted from _Jen-min jih-pao_
_(People's Daily)_, April 28, 1969.

<a id="bot_8">[[8]](#8)</a> "On Coalition Government," _Selected Works of
Mao Tsetung_, Vol. 3, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 932.

<a id="bot_9">[[9]](#9)</a> "Preface to _Imperialism, the Highest Stage
of Capitalism_, _Selected Works of Lenin_, Vol.
2, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she 1972, p. 730.

<a id="bot_10">[[10]](#10)</a> Quoted from _Jen-min jih-pao_
_\[People's Daily\]_, June 11, 1967.

<a id="bot_11">[[11]](#11)</a> _Communist Manifesto_,
_Selected Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 1, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1972, pp. 285-86.
