[*15* Develop Socialist Production with Greater, Faster, and Better Results at Lower Costs](#) 
=================================================================================================================================

[The Nature and Goal of Socialist Production and the Means of Achieving
This Goal](#)<a id="bot_s_a">[\*](#bot_s_a)</a>

The elimination of the private ownership system of the means of
production and the establishment of the socialist public ownership
system has led to a fundamental change in the social relations of people
in the production, exchange, and distribution processes. First of all,
the nature of social production has changed. The goal of social
production and the means to attain the goal of production have also
changed. Thus, the development of socialist production follows different
laws from those of capitalist production. Only by correctly
understanding and making use of these laws can socialist production be
developed with greater, faster, and better results at lower costs.

[Socialist Public Ownership Has Fundamentally Changed the Nature of Social Production](#)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _The Direct Social Product under Socialism Possesses, in Varying Degrees, the Characteristics of the Commodity_

Production of material wealth is a necessary condition for the survival
and development of human society. Under different social
and economic systems, however, social products possess different
characteristics.

Under the private ownership system of the means of production,
production is the individual's private affair. The product belongs to
him. Therefore, production is always directly manifested as private
production. The product is also directly manifested as a private
product. When this product is not produced for the consumption of the
producer, but is instead intended for exchange, then it becomes a
commodity. This private product also possesses a social nature. But,
this social nature is concealed by the private ownership system and
cannot be directly manifested. Only through exchanges, when the produced
commodity has been proven to meet the needs of society, can the social
nature of the product be affirmed. In capitalist society, all products
are private products and also commodities. Capitalist production is the
most developed form of private commodity production.

In socialist society, after the socialist transformation of the system
of ownership of the means of production has been basically completed,
with the exception of a small amount of family sidelines operated by
members of the rural collective economy, the whole of social production
has been established on the basis of a system of public ownership of the
means of production. Seen as a whole, the production of the state
economy and the collective economy based on the socialist public
ownership system is organized according to plans throughout the whole
country. It is conducted to directly meet the needs of society, namely,
to directly meet the needs of the proletariat and the whole laboring
people. This kind of production has lost the nature of private
production. Looked at from its basic aspect, it has become direct social
production. Labor products are also socially useful from the start, and
therefore they are no longer private products but are direct social
products. Needless to say, the labor that is engaged in direct social
production to create direct social product is no longer private labor
but is direct social labor. Engels once observed, "Once society
possesses the means of production and uses them in direct social forms
for production, then everybody's labor, whatever its
specific uses may be, becomes direct social labor right away."
<a id="1">[[1]](#bot_1)</a>

In the historical development process of human society, direct social
production once existed in the primitive commune. At that time, "the
commune members combined to form a society directly for production."
<a id="2">[[2]](#bot_2)</a> They labored
together and distributed products to the members according to custom and
need. This was a kind of direct social production based on a system of
public ownership by the clan commune. It appeared when the level of
productive forces was low and social division of labor was
underdeveloped. It was a primitive public ownership economy without
commodity production and exchange.

Socialist direct social production is large-scale social production
based on division of labor and cooperation among millions, tens of
millions, hundreds of millions of people. In the fairly long historical
period of socialist society, the socialist system of public ownership
still consists of two forms. Socialist direct social production is
conducted on the basis of these two forms of socialist public ownership.
Products are owned respectively by the socialist state and various
enterprises under the collective ownership system. This determines that
direct social production under socialism cannot eliminate commodity
production and exchange. To attain normal economic relations between
these two types of socialist public ownership and between industry and
agriculture and to facilitate the consolidation of the worker-peasant
alliance, it is necessary to retain and suitably develop commodity
production and exchange for a fairly long period of time. This cannot be
changed at will. Lenin pointed out, "Commodity exchange is a yardstick
to measure the normality of the interrelations between industry and
agriculture." <a id="3">[[3]](#bot_3)</a>

Socialist commodities primarily reflect the relation between the economy
under the state ownership system and the economy under the collective
ownership system and the relations among different collective economies.
In the state economy, products are transferred from one state enterprise
to another state enterprise. For example, the rolled steel of a state
iron and steel mill is transferred to a state plant which
builds spinning and weaving machines. Or the weaving machine built by a
state spinning and weaving machine plant is transferred to a state
spinning and weaving mill. The product is still owned by the socialist
state, and there has been no transfer of ownership rights. Furthermore,
product transfers among state enterprises are usually allocated and
delivered according to state plans rather than taking place through the
market. Therefore, this type of product transfer is basically not
commodity exchange. It already possesses many characteristics of the
communist distribution of products.

But the socialist economy is an integrated whole; the commodity
relations between the two forms of socialist public ownership system
cannot but be reflected in the exchange relations within the state
ownership system. Meanwhile, with the present level of productivity,
material conditions demand that the state enterprises maintain their
relative independence of operation and management and that they trade
with each other according to the principle of exchanges of equivalent
value. Therefore, although the commodities exchanged among state
enterprises are basically no longer commodities, they still possess
certain commodity characteristics and must be expressed in terms of
price and purchased with money. When distributed for the members'
consumption, food grains produced by the rural collective economy must
also be expressed in terms of price and money. This inevitably brands
the product as a commodity. Therefore, socialist products are direct
social products on the one hand, but they also possess commodity
characteristics in varying degrees. Socialist commodities differ from
other historical commodities. They possess three characteristics: (1)
They are based on a public ownership system of the means of production
and are primarily an expression of the exchange relations between the
worker and the peasant. (2) In contrast to the unorganized and unplanned
capitalist commodity production, a great majority of socialist
commodities are produced in a planned manner under the guidance of state
planning. (3) Compared with the capitalist society, the scope of
commodities is greatly reduced in the socialist society.
Labor power is no longer a commodity. Land, mineral resources, and other
natural resources are no longer commodities either. The means of
production circulating within the socialist state ownership system have
also undergone significant changes and have lost certain properties of
commodities.

Direct social products with varying degrees of commodity characteristics
are an expression of the special duality of socialist products. They
reflect the characteristics of socialist production relations in the
transition period from capitalism to socialism. Direct social products
are the dominant aspect of this duality. This is the aspect common to
socialist and communist products. Although socialist commodities are
fundamentally different from all historical commodities based on a
private ownership system, the commodity-money relationship has, after
all, been a tradition of the old economy for thousands of years.
Socialist products with varying degrees of commodity characteristics
show that compared with communist direct social products, socialist
direct social products are still immature and carry with them traditions
and influences of the old society. Communist direct social products will
be completely free of these traditions and influences of the old
society, namely, commodity characteristics. At that time, labor expended
on the production of products will no longer be expressed as the value
of these products.

That socialist direct social products still possess varying degrees of
commodity characteristics is determined by the level of productivity in
the socialist period and by the two forms of socialist public ownership
system and other material economic conditions. Since socialist products
still possess varying degrees of commodity characteristics, categories
related to commodities, such as use value and exchange value, concrete
and abstract labor, money, price, and so forth, will certainly exist. To
negate the commodity aspects of socialist direct social products and to
attempt to abolish commodity production prematurely is obviously
erroneous. Ch'en Po-ta, a renegade and Trotskyite, clamored for the
abolition of commodity production and exchange during the
period of the rapid development of China's rural people's commune
movement in a vain attempt to lead revolution and construction astray.
Chairman Mao saw through this conspiracy in time and engaged him in a
resolute struggle. In the resolutions of the Sixth Plenum of the Eighth
Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party personally convened and
chaired by Chairman Mao, this was pointed out: "This way of thinking
which attempts to prematurely abolish commodity production and exchange,
prematurely negate the constructive role of commodities, value, money,
and price is detrimental to developing socialist construction and is
therefore incorrect."
<a id="4">[[4]](#bot_4)</a> Socialist commodity
production must not only be retained, but must also be developed to
consolidate the economic link between China's industry and agriculture
and between urban and rural areas in order to promote the development of
socialist construction.

On the other hand, however, we must also see that although socialist
commodity production based on a public ownership system is fundamentally
different from private commodity production, the fact that products are
produced as commodities cannot but still be a reflection of the
traditions and influences of the old society. Such categories as
commodity, value, money, and price are things that can be used by the
bourgeoisie and its agents in the Communist Party. The proletariat wants
to use commodity production to promote socialist construction, while the
bourgeoisie wants to use commodity production to restore capitalism. In
the three years of natural calamities from 1960 to 1962, the Liu
Shao-ch'i clique unscrupulously advocated an extension of the privately
retained plot, an uncontrolled development of the free market, and a
system of "internal responsibility for profit and loss" in the state
economy. Their intention was to use the principle of capitalist
commodity production to "transform" the socialist economy and restore
the capitalist system in China. Chairman Mao was the first to discover
this evil intention of the Liu Shao-ch'i clique. He led the whole Party
to solemnly criticize and repudiate the revisionist line carried out by
the Liu Shao-ch'i clique so that China's commodity production could
develop progressively along the socialist path.

### _The Socialist Production Process Is a Unity of the Labor Process and the Value-Creation Process_

The duality of socialist products is reflected in the duality of the
production process for socialist products. As production for direct
social products, it is a labor process which creates in a planned manner
various use values to satisfy the needs of the proletariat and the whole
laboring people. As commodity production, the labor of the producer not
only creates various concrete use values but also exchange values. The
socialist production process is a unity of this labor process and the
value-creation process. The characteristics of socialist production can
only be determined with reference to the characteristics of the
socialist labor process and value-creation process.

Abstracting from various specific social conditions and examining it
from the viewpoint of the functions performed by the various primary
factors of production, the labor process is merely a process through
which the people who possess labor power embody it in materials,
creating expected products --- it is a purposeful activity for creating
use value, it is a process of material transformation between man and
Nature. However, all production processes are carried on under certain
social conditions. Therefore, labor processes reflect the relations not
only between man and Nature, but also among men. Looking at it from this
viewpoint, there is a fundamental difference between the labor process
under socialism and the labor process under capitalism.

The labor process under the capitalist system is a process in which the
capitalist consumes labor power. Its characteristics are: The worker
labors under the supervision of the capitalist, and labor products
belong to the capitalist, that is, labor under the capitalist system is
hired labor, slave labor, and hard labor performed by the exploited.

Under the socialist system, for the first time the laboring people
become masters of the state and the enterprise. Consequently, there
appear in the socialist labor process new characteristics without
historical precedent. Lenin said: "Every factory from which the
capitalist has been expelled, or at least in which the
capitalist is controlled by genuine worker supervision, and every
village from which the landlord exploiter has been expelled and his land
expropriated only then becomes the domain of the laborer. Here, the
laborer can express his talent, keep his back straight, be proud of
himself, and feel that he too is a human being. He has been toiling for
others for millennia, performing hard labor for exploiters. Now for the
first time, he can work for himself, using all the newest achievements
of technology and culture."
<a id="5">[[5]](#bot_5)</a> The socialist labor
process is a process in which the worker, the peasant, and other
laborers create material wealth for the laboring class itself. Its
characteristics are: The laboring people, as their own masters, are
engaged in organized and planned labor in socialist production. The
whole labor product is distributed by the laboring class itself.
Therefore, socialist labor is planned labor not subject to exploitation
and is voluntary labor of the laboring people for the creation of social
wealth.

However, the socialist society is a society with classes. In addition to
the laboring class, there is the exploitative class. The former
exploiters must also labor in the socialist society in which consumption
depends on labor. Supervised labor is imposed on the landlords, the rich
peasants, and members of other antagonistic classes. The bourgeois
elements are allowed to reform through labor in the enterprise. The
treatment given to these two exploitative classes is different because
the nature of their contradictions with the laboring people is
different. But as exploiters, their labor necessarily carries with it
varying degrees of coercion. Naturally, this coercion imposed on the
exploiter by the laborer is fundamentally different from the coercion
imposed by the exploiter on the laborer. In the past, the exploiter
coerced the laborer to labor in order to exploit the surplus value of
the laborer. Now the laborer coerces the exploiter to labor in order to
transform him into a new person. Therefore, the socialist labor process
is also a process for reforming the exploiter. This is to say, the
socialist labor process does not merely involve material conversion
between man and Nature but also contains social and class reform.

As far as the laboring people are concerned, the socialist
labor process still carries with it traditions and influences of the old
society. This is because the old social division of labor left behind by
the capitalist society can only gradually be eliminated in the whole
historical stage of socialism. The position of the laboring people in
socialist production cannot but be restricted and affected by the old
social division of labor: Some people are primarily engaged in mental
labor, while some people are primarily engaged in physical labor; some
people occupy a position of leadership and management in production,
while others occupy the position of being direct producers. The
opposition between mental and physical labor is one of the most
important sources of inequality in the capitalist society. The socialist
society has overcome this opposition. But an essential difference still
exists. This essential difference can also develop into opposition under
certain conditions. The Soviet Union, under the rule of the Brezhnev
renegade clique, is ruled precisely by the bureaucratic monopoly
bourgeoisie, namely, a handful of "people using their brains" including
Party bureaucrats, intellectual aristocrats, and technical bureaucrats.
Therefore, the process by which the laboring people come to be the
masters of society and enterprise in socialist society is a long process
of struggle. It is not only a process of struggle with the bourgeoisie
and its agents in the Party, but also a process in which favorable
conditions are created gradually to eliminate the essential difference
between mental and physical labor. In the socialist period, although all
the laboring people are free from exploitation, labor has still not
become the primary commitment in the lives of all the laborers. This
remaining tradition and influence of the old society concerning the
nature of labor can only finally be swept away in the highest stage of
communism.

These characteristics of the socialist labor process are also reflected
in the value-creation process.

Every commodity embodies the duality of labor: Concrete labor creates
use values, while abstract labor creates exchange values. Value reflects
certain social relations. Under different social and
economic conditions, the social relations reflected by value are
different and so is the formation of value.

Under the conditions of a simple commodity economy, the peasant or
handicraftsman produces using his own means of production. Labor
products and their values naturally belong to him. After the commodity
is sold, he gets back the value of the means of production expended in
the production process. But he also realizes the new value created by
his own labor. This new value compensates for the value of the means of
livelihood required for the reproduction of labor power. This way, the
production process can continue on the scale of simple reproduction.
Marx called the value-formation process under simple commodity
production the simple value-formation process.

Under capitalism, the purpose of commodity production by the capitalist
is to exploit the surplus value of the worker. Through the production
and sale of commodities, the capitalist gets back the value of the means
of production expended in the production process. At the same time, the
new value created by the labor of the worker not only compensates for
the variable capital used by the capitalist to purchase labor power, but
also creates a surplus. This surplus is the surplus value extracted by
the capitalist. Marx called this value-formation process in capitalist
production the value-augmenting process. This category of the
value-augmenting process reflects the exploitative relations between
capital and hired labor.

In the socialist production process, the labor of the laborer, as
concrete labor, transfers and preserves the value of the means of
production expended in the production process. As abstract labor, it
creates new value. Should this new value created by the producer belong
totally to the producer himself? No. To realize socialist expanded
reproduction and to satisfy the various common needs of the laborers,
society must control various social funds. These social funds can only
come from the new value created by the producer. If the newly created
value belongs entirely to the producer himself, then the socialist
economy will not be able to carry on expanded reproduction.
It can only maintain simple reproduction. The common needs
of the laborers cannot be satisfied either. Therefore, in the socialist
society, the new value created by the producer must be divided into two
parts. One part is at the disposal of the producer himself. It
constitutes the labor remuneration fund for the producer and is used to
satisfy personal livelihood needs of the producer. Another part is at
the disposal of society. It constitutes various social funds, namely,
social net income, and is used to further develop socialist production
and satisfy the various common needs of the whole laboring people.
Consequently, as a producer, a part of the new value created by him has
to be deducted for the disposal of society as social funds. As a member
of the laboring people, he is fully entitled to enjoy, with the other
laboring people, the welfare brought about by the social funds.
Therefore, the distribution of the new value created by the producer
into the labor remuneration fund and the social fund under the socialist
system is fundamentally different from the distribution of the new value
created by the worker into wages and surplus value under the capitalist
system. Under the capitalist system, labor is a commodity and is subject
to the law of value. Wage means the price of labor power. No matter how
large the newly created value is, the part that belongs to the worker
himself is only equal to the value of those means of livelihood
necessary for the reproduction of labor power. The rest, namely, the
surplus value, is not only possessed by the capitalist, but is used as a
means to increase the exploitation of the worker. Under the socialist
system, labor power is no longer a commodity. The laborer is no longer
exploited. All of the value created by the producer is at the service of
the laboring class. The distribution of the labor remuneration fund of
the producer and the social fund is regulated by an overall
consideration of common and individual interests and the long-term and
short-term interests of the laboring people.

Consequently, the value-formation process under the socialist system is
different not only from the simple value-formation process under simple
commodity production but also from the value-augmenting
process in capitalist production. It is a special value-creation process
reflecting socialist production relations. The socialist production
process is a unity of this labor process and the value-creation process.

[The Basic Economic Law of Socialism Embodies the Most Essential Relations of Socialist Production](#)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _The Purpose of Socialist Production Is to Satisfy the Ever-Increasing Needs of the State and the People_

The socialist production process is a unity of the labor process and the
value-creation process. What then is the dominant aspect of the
contradiction in this duality?

One dominant aspect of the contradiction in social production embodies
the objective purpose of this social production and reflects the most
essential relations of this social production. It is independent of the
people's will; it is ultimately determined by the nature of the
ownership of the means of production. Social production has to serve the
interests of the class who owns the means of production.

Under the capitalist ownership system of the means of production, the
labor process also provides use values. But this is not the purpose of
capitalist production. The capitalist operates factories in order to
exploit the worker and obtain profit through the value-augmenting
process. Value augmentation is the dominant aspect of capitalist
production. It embodies the most essential relations in capitalist
production. Marx pointed out, "The purpose of capital accumulation is
not the satisfaction of needs but the production of profit."
<a id="6">[[6]](#bot_6)</a> "Capital and its
accumulation are manifested as the beginning and the end of production
and the motive and purpose of production."
<a id="7">[[7]](#bot_7)</a>

The socialist public ownership system of the means of production makes
the laboring people become the masters of production. Social production
must serve the needs of the whole laboring people. Therefore, a labor
process that creates use values in a planned manner to satisfy the needs
of the laboring people is the dominant aspect of socialist
production. It embodies the objective purpose of socialist production
and the most essential relations of socialist production. The
value-creation process is subordinate to the socialist labor process
which creates use values. In the socialist production process, it is
entirely necessary to compute labor expenditure, profit, and loss. But,
what and how much to produce cannot be affected by the size of the value
of production and the size of profit. Instead, they should be based on
the needs of the whole laboring people. Whatever is urgently needed by
the laboring people should be produced in greater quantity with the
greatest possible effort, even at the risk of temporary losses. On the
other hand, anything that is not urgently required by the laboring
people, even if its value of production and profits are high, cannot be
indiscriminately produced in great quantity. The reason why it is
necessary for the socialist enterprise to compute labor expenditure,
profit, and loss is in order to reduce costs so that the enterprise can
be compensated in value and can also provide an ever-increasing social
fund for developing production at a high speed and increasing the supply
of social product. Ultimately, the subordination of the value-creation
process to the labor process is for the purpose of creating an
ever-increasing quantity of social wealth to satisfy the needs of the
whole laboring people. Before the victory of the October Revolution,
Lenin pointed out that in socialist society, "the wealth created by
common labor is for the benefit of the whole laboring people and not for
that of a handful of rich people."
<a id="8">[[8]](#bot_8)</a>

The purpose of socialist production is to satisfy the needs of the whole
laboring people. But the long-term interests of the laboring people and
their interests as a whole have to be reflected and expressed through
the state under proletarian dictatorship. Therefore, the purpose of
socialist production can also be described as the satisfaction of the
ever-increasing needs of the socialist state and its people. These needs
are multifaceted. To develop their morals, intelligence, and physique,
there is a need for the proletariat and the laboring people continually
to raise the level of their material and cultural life.
Since classes, class contradictions, class struggle, the danger of
capitalist restoration, and the threat of sabotage and aggression from
imperialism and social imperialism still exist in the socialist society,
there is a need for the socialist country to consolidate proletarian
dictatorship and strengthen national defense. And since the proletariat
can once and for all liberate itself only by liberating the whole human
race, there is a need for the socialist country to discharge its
obligation to internationalism and support the revolutionary struggles
of the peoples of the world. Therefore, the purpose of socialist
production is to raise the level of the material and cultural life of
the proletariat and the laboring people, consolidate proletarian
dictatorship, strengthen national defense, and support the revolutionary
struggles of the peoples of the world. Ultimately, it must serve to
eliminate classes and realize communism.

The great strategic policy formulated by Chairman Mao to "be prepared
for war, be prepared for natural disasters, and do everything for the
people" fully embodies the objective purpose of socialist production and
points out a correct direction for the development of China's socialist
production and the whole national economy. Under the guidance of
Chairman Mao's proletarian revolutionary line and his general and
specific policies, China's socialist production develops vigorously. The
level of the people's material and cultural life is increasing all the
time. Proletarian dictatorship is continually being strengthened and
consolidated. Within our capacity, we have given aid to the world's
revolutionary enterprises.

In the Soviet Union under the rule of the Brezhnev renegade clique, the
law of surplus value governs social production. The purpose of
production is to pursue profit and to guarantee that the largest
possible amount of surplus value is extracted from the laboring people
of the Soviet Union by the bureaucratic monopoly bourgeoisie. But in
order to deceive the masses, the Soviet revisionist renegade clique
morbidly clings to pseudo-communism. They try hard to distort the
purpose of socialist production and say something like: "The highest
purpose is to raise people's welfare." "Everybody will have enough food,
clothing, shoes, housing, and books. We call this
communism." This renegade clique deceives the masses with the sweet talk
of bourgeois welfare. The intent is to make them forget class struggle
and revolution in order to facilitate this renegade clique's restoration
of capitalism. In the Soviet Union, the only people who eat well, dress
well, and are properly sheltered are the bureaucratic monopoly
bourgeoisie and the revisionist intellectual aristocracy under their
wing. The broad laboring people have again fallen into an abyss of
exploitation and suffering.

### _Grasp Revolution, Promote Production_

The dominant aspect of the socialist production process, namely, the
most essential thing that determines socialist production, is the
satisfaction of the ever-increasing needs of the state and the people.
To realize this purpose, social production must be developed in order to
increase total social output. Marx and Engels pointed out in the
_Communist Manifesto_ that after the proletariat has
overthrown bourgeois rule, it will use its political rule to expropriate
the capitalist. "\[It\] will put all tools of production into the hands
of the state, namely, the proletariat who has organized itself into a
ruling class, and increase total productivity as fast as possible."
<a id="9">[[9]](#bot_9)</a> When China was
faced with the transition from the new democratic revolution to the
socialist revolution and the shift of emphasis of Party work from the
rural areas to the urban areas, Chairman Mao also earnestly taught us to
pay attention to the rehabilitation and development of production,
saying, "From the day when we take over the administration of the city,
our eyes have to focus on the recovery and development of this city's
production enterprise."
<a id="10">[[10]](#bot_10)</a>

There are generally two ways of developing social production and
increasing total social output. One is to increase the labor force in
production as population increases. In general, this may increase the
total social output, but it cannot increase per capita product. Another
way is to increase labor productivity. This not only increases total
social output, but also per capita product. From the
long-range viewpoint, the major way to develop socialist production can
only be by increasing labor productivity. When he discussed the
significance of increasing labor productivity, Lenin said, "Only by
increasing production and increasing labor productivity can Soviet
Russia obtain victory."
<a id="11">[[11]](#bot_11)</a> He also said,
"Labor productivity is the most important thing that ultimately
guarantees the victory of a new social system."
<a id="12">[[12]](#bot_12)</a>

How then can labor productivity be increased to develop socialist
production?

Marxism holds that productive forces develop under the constraint and
impetus of production relations. In class society, production is always
carried on under certain class relations. Even though changes and
developments in social production always start from changes and advances
in productive forces, big advances in productive forces always occur
after big transformations in production relations. In the beginning of
capitalist development, it is always necessary to have a bourgeois
revolution to make capitalist production relations become the major
economic basis of society before big advances in the productive forces
occur. In socialist society, it is also only after the establishment of
proletarian dictatorship, the penetrating unfolding of socialist
revolution, socialist nationalization, and agricultural
collectivization, and the establishment of socialist production
relations as the only economic basis of society that big advances in the
productive forces can occur. When the socialist transformation of the
ownership system of the means of production is basically completed,
revolution is not yet finished. In production relations, only by
consolidating socialist production relations corresponding to the
development of productive forces and opportunely adjusting or
transforming that part of production relations which conflicts with the
development of productive forces can socialist production be developed
continuously and rapidly.

Advances in science and technology and innovations in production tools
play a big role in developing production and raising labor productivity.
But, "the determining factor is the people, not things."
<a id="13">[[13]](#bot_13)</a> Science and
technology are discovered by people, and production tools are created by
people. "Of all things in the world, people are the most valuable. Under
the leadership of the Communist Party, any miracle of the human world
can be created if we have people."
<a id="14">[[14]](#bot_14)</a> The broad masses
of China put it well: "Fear not the lack of machines; fear only the lack
of ambition. With one red heart and two hands, everything can be
produced through self-reliance." The socialist activism of the broad
masses must be mobilized by the political and ideological work of the
Party. Only by lifting the key link of political and ideological work,
by widely and deeply mobilizing the masses to discuss major national
issues, by criticizing and repudiating revisionism, the Confucian and
Mencian mentalities and all world outlooks of the exploitative class,
and by fundamentally raising the consciousness of the broad masses
concerning class struggle and line struggle can socialist production be
continuously and rapidly developed.

Therefore, in socialist society, the ultimate way to develop production
and increase labor productivity is to insist on continuing revolution
under proletarian dictatorship. After the proletariat seizes political
power, only by exercising the influence of the socialist superstructure
to unfold penetratingly socialist revolution on the political, economic,
and ideological battlefronts under the guidance of the Party's correct
line and with the aid of government power under proletarian dictatorship
can the sabotage and obstruction of the bourgeoisie and capitalist
influence be swept away and destroyed. Only then can socialist
production relations be consolidated and improved and can all
constructive factors be mobilized to promote the development of
socialist production at a high speed. The policy "grasp revolution and
promote production" formulated by Chairman Mao correctly reflects the
requirement of the objective law governing the motion of the basic
contradiction of socialist society. This policy teaches us that only by
commanding all economic work with proletarian politics and propelling
production with revolution can China's socialist production be
guaranteed to advance with big strides in the correct direction.

The revisionist clique of Brezhnev, Liu Shao-ch'i, and Lin
Piao always uses the reactionary "productivity-first theory" to oppose
continuous revolution under proletarian dictatorship. This renegade
clique always deals with production as production and opposes revolution
under the pretext of developing production. It even attributes the
development of production wholly to the development of science and
technology and the improvement of production tools to a reliance on
bourgeois experts. The revisionist line pushed by the clique of Liu
Shao-ch'i and Lin Piao has been overthrown, but the lingering poison of
this "productivity-first theory" has not been completely swept away and
has to be criticized and repudiated repeatedly.

### _The Basic Economic Law of Socialism Determines All Major Aspects of Development of the Socialist Economy_

The objective purpose of social production and the means to realize it
express the basic direction of development of social production and
embody the requirement of the basic economic law of society. Different
social and economic systems have different purposes of production and
different means to achieve it. Consequently, there are different basic
economic laws. The purpose of socialist production is to satisfy the
ever-increasing needs of the state and the people. The means to attain
this purpose is by propelling the development of technology and
production through revolution. Therefore, to sum up briefly, the major
characteristics and requirements of the basic economic law of socialism
are: to continually increase the level of technology, develop socialist
production with greater, faster, and better results at lower costs,
satisfy the ever-increasing needs of the state and the people, and
create the material conditions for the ultimate elimination of classes
and the realization of communism under the command of proletarian
politics.

The basic economic law of socialism determines all major aspects of
development of the socialist economy and the basic content of socialist
production, exchange, distribution, and consumption.

As far as production is concerned, what and how much to
produce and how production should be arranged in the socialist society
must follow what this law demands. In setting up plans, the socialist
country specifies the variety, quantity, and arrangement of production
according to the requirements of the basic economic law of socialism in
order to make the development of socialist production conducive to
consolidating proletarian dictatorship, strengthening national defense,
supporting the revolutionary struggles of the peoples of the world, and
continually increasing the level of material and cultural life of the
laboring people.

Socialist exchange must also obey the requirements of the basic economic
law of socialism. In determining the proportion of export and import,
the proportion of military and civilian use, the proportion of supply to
the rural and the urban areas, and the prices of products, the first
thing that the socialist country considers is not how much money can be
obtained or how much the profit is. The first thing it considers is
whether the arrangement is favorable to increasing the level of material
and cultural life of the laboring people, consolidating the
worker-peasant alliance, strengthening national defense, and supporting
the revolutionary struggles of the peoples of the world.

The basic economic law of socialism also determines socialist
distribution and consumption. In the distribution of national income and
personal consumption goods, the socialist state must obey the
requirements of the basic economic law of socialism. For example, the
determination of the proportion between accumulation and consumption and
the level of wages must take into account both long-term and immediate
interests and the collective and individual interests of the laboring
people. Similarly, socialist consumption, whether it be group or
individual consumption, must be favorable to continually improving the
material and cultural life of the proletariat and the laboring people,
revolutionizing people's thought, fostering new socialist customs,
consolidating proletarian dictatorship, and accelerating socialist
construction.

In summary, the basic economic law of socialism embodies
the most essential links between socialist production,
exchange, distribution, and consumption. It determines the ultimate
direction of development of the socialist economy. The correct
understanding and use of the basic economic law of socialism can
strengthen our self-awareness, overcome blind impulses in our work, and
help us to advance with big strides in the correct socialist direction.

[The Rapid Development of Socialist Production Is a Unity of Objective Possibility and Subjective Initiative](#)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _The Socialist System Can Make Production Develop at Speeds Which Would Be Impossible for the Old Society_

The purpose of socialist production is to satisfy the everincreasing
needs of the state and the people. The degree of satisfaction of these
needs is closely related to the speed with which production develops.
The consolidation of national defense in the socialist country, the
development of cultural, educational, and health facilities in socialist
society, the improvement of the material and cultural life of the
people, and aid to the revolutionary enterprises of the world's peoples
all require rapid development of socialist production to create the
material preconditions. Also, because imperialist rule is always
overthrown at its weakest link, the first countries in which socialist
revolution is successful are likely to have a relatively weak industrial
basis. This all the more increases the objective necessity for rapidly
developing socialist production.

Under the socialist system, it is not only necessary, but possible, to
have rapid development of production. Chairman Mao pointed out: "When we
say socialist production relations are more suitable for developing the
productive forces than the old production relations, we are referring to
the conditions in which the productive forces are permitted to develop
at speeds which would be impossible in the old society, and
consequently, the ever-increasing needs of the people can be satisfied
by continually expanding production."
<a id="15">[[15]](#bot_15)</a>
Therefore, a rapid development of socialist production is not a mere
hope, but is based on an objective possibility of socialist production
relations. It is a manifestation of the superiority of the socialist
system.

How can socialist production relations propel production and the whole
national economy to develop at high speed?

First of all, the socialist system provides wide-ranging possibilities
for the exercise of the production activism and creativity of the
laboring people. Under the socialist system, the proletariat and the
laboring people are no longer sellers of labor power. They have freed
themselves from enslavement and exploitation and have become masters of
the new society. They no longer perform hard labor for any exploiter but
instead work for the interests of their own class. Labor has become a
glorious and great career. This change in the position of the laboring
people in social production makes them begin to really concern
themselves with production as masters and exercise their inexhaustible
talents. People with the ability to labor are the most important factor
in production. That socialist production relations can propel production
to develop at a high speed is primarily because the activism and
creative talents of the laboring masses which have been suppressed under
the capitalist system are now liberated.

Second, the socialist system eliminates the immense waste of manpower,
material resources, and finances that is inevitable under competition
and the chaotic conditions of capitalism. The socialist country can
fully and rationally utilize labor and material resources by using a
unified plan to direct the development of the whole national economy,
using facilities and natural resources in a planned and rational manner,
and training and allocating labor power in a planned and rational
manner.

Third, the socialist revolution has eliminated the system of man
exploiting man and has made it possible to use that part of the wealth
which was formerly used by a handful of exploitative classes on
parasitic consumption to improve the livelihood of the laboring people
and to develop socialist production.

Fourth, the socialist system has cleared a wide road for a rapid
development of science and technology. Under the capitalist
system, new technology is used only when it can bring more
profit to the capitalist. New technology that has already been adopted
is monopolized by the capitalist as "trade secrets." This inevitably
restricts the development of new technology. Under the socialist system,
the adoption of new technology is for the sake of saving labor
expenditure in production. It is also for the sake of reducing the labor
intensity of the laboring people and improving labor conditions.
Therefore, the development of science and technology becomes a conscious
demand of the laboring people. Furthermore, the advanced experience in
technical innovations of any one socialist enterprise is the common
property of the laboring people. It can be quickly adopted by other
enterprises after summing up and extension.

Fifth, the socialist system has eliminated the contradictions between
production increase and the relative decrease of mass purchasing power
peculiar to capitalism. This is because with the development of
socialist production, the consumption level of the proletariat and the
laboring people steadily increases and the scale of national
construction steadily expands. Economic crises due to overproduction
never occur. This clears away artificial obstacles to the rapid
development of production.

Although the objective possibility exists in the socialist system for a
rapid development of production, there also exist some factors which
undermine and inhibit the rapid development of production. Examples are
the sabotage activities of the bourgeoisie and its agents, the
obstruction from the established influence of the petty bourgeoisie, the
ravages brought about by natural calamities, and so forth. In addition
to the objective existence of these social and natural factors, there
are also subjective factors related to the proletariat itself. On their
way to unfolding socialist revolution and socialist construction, the
proletariat will certainly be faced with new situations and new
problems. In order to understand the objective law of the new situation
and to find correct methods to solve the new problem, a period of time
is needed to accumulate experience. Socialist construction is not
expected to proceed smoothly; it can only advance in a wavelike manner.
To turn the objective possibility into a reality of rapid
development, our subjective efforts are required. Here a Marxist line
which correctly reflects the objective law plays a determining role.
Once the line is correct, the political party of the proletariat, good
at summing up rich practical experience, will be able to lead the whole
laboring people to overcome the sabotage of the class enemy and the
obstruction of natural calamities and realize rapid development of
socialist production.

### _The General Line Is a Compass for Building Socialism with Greater, Faster, and Better Results at Lower Costs_

After summing up the internal and external experience and lessons in
socialist construction, in 1958 Chairman Mao formulated the General Line
"go all out, aim high, and build socialism with greater, faster, and
better results at lower costs." It is a Marxist line that fully utilizes
the superiority of the socialist system, fully exercises the subjective
initiative of people, and seeks to build socialism with greater, faster,
and better results at lower costs.

The General Line for socialist construction requires the unification of
greater, faster, and better results at lower costs in socialist
construction. "Greater" refers to the quantity of products, "faster"
refers to time, "better" refers to quality, and "lower costs" refers to
less labor expenditure. The requirements of greater, faster, and better
results at lower costs are mutually reinforcing as well as
interdependent. If we pay attention only to greater and faster results
at the expense of better results and lower costs, the result will be
poor quality and high costs. From the viewpoint of the longterm and the
whole situation, it does not really cause greater and faster results but
rather smaller and slower results. If we pay attention only to better
results and lower costs at the expense of greater and faster results,
although product quality may be high, there will not be enough produced.
The speed of construction will be too slow to satisfy the needs of the
state and the people. Only if we can build socialism with greater,
faster, and better results at lower costs can there by a
truly rapid development and can the ever-increasing needs of the state
and the people be satisfied to the greatest possible extent. The General
Line for socialist construction and a whole series of
"walking-on-two-legs" policies formulated by Chairman Mao enable
industry and agriculture, heavy and light industry, large-scale, medium,
and smallscale industry, production by foreign and indigenous methods,
and so forth to complement and promote each other, thus guaranteeing the
balanced development of the various sectors of China's socialist
national economies. This General Line correctly reflects the objective
requirements of the basic economic laws of socialism, the law of rapid
development in socialist production and the law of planned development
of the national economy, and the revolutionary will of the people of the
whole country to demand a rapid change in the backward appearance of the
country.

How can greater, faster, and better results at lower costs be achieved
and smaller, slower, and worse results at higher costs be avoided in
socialist construction? The key lies in fully mobilizing mass activism
in building socialism. Marxism has long held that "historical activities
are the enterprise of the masses."
<a id="16">[[16]](#bot_16)</a>
Chairman Mao teaches, "People, and only people, are the motive force of
history." <a id="17">[[17]](#bot_17)</a>
Chairman Mao pointed out more than once that the masses have to be
relied upon to seize political power and build socialism. The Lin Piao
clique, loyal disciples of Confucius, slandered the masses in every
possible way. They boasted that their "brains are not those of the
ordinary peasant, nor those of the ordinary worker." They tried hard to
peddle a Confucian fallacy that "only the most intelligent and most
stupid are not subject to change," fully exposing their position as
diehard enemies of the people. Numerous facts demonstrate that the most
humble is the most intelligent and the most noble is the most stupid.
Only by fully trusting the masses, relying on the masses, respecting the
innovative spirit of the masses, mobilizing all constructive factors,
uniting all people that can be united, and as much as possible,
converting destructive factors into constructive ones can socialist
revolution be victoriously unfolded on the political, economic,
ideological, and cultural battlefronts and can socialist production and
scientific, cultural, and educational enterprises be developed with
greater, faster, and better results at lower costs. The General Line for
socialist construction emphasizes the combination of Party leadership
and the broad people and is a new development of the Party's mass line
on socialist construction.

"Going all out and aiming high" refers to the spiritual condition and
subjective initiative of people. This shows that the General Line gives
prominence to having proletarian politics in command and emphasizes the
role of the revolutionary drive of the masses in socialist construction.
The Party's task in socialist construction is to lift the key link of
political-ideological work, raise the socialist consciousness of the
people with respect to socialism, help the masses master the Party's
Marxist line and general and specific policies, and mobilize and
organize the broad masses to struggle for the great enterprise of
building socialism. Chairman Mao teaches us: "Social wealth is created
by the worker, the peasant, and the educated. As long as these people
control their destiny, have a Marxist-Leninist line, and solve problems
with a constructive attitude rather than avoiding them, any difficulty
in the human world is solvable."
<a id="18">[[18]](#bot_18)</a> Once the broad
revolutionary masses has mastered the Party's Marxist line, an immense
revolutionary drive will be aroused and will become a substantial
material force for creating miracles in the human world. The Great Leap
Forward in China's national economy appeared because of this.

### _Realize a Great Leap Forward in the National Economy through Independence and Self-Reliance_

Under the guidance of the General Line, "Go all out, aim high, and build
socialism with greater, faster, and better results at lower costs," the
working class and the whole laboring people of China are high-spirited
and combat ready. Their revolutionary spirit of daring to think, speak,
and act is sky-high. The upsurge in socialist competition
to compare with, learn from, and catch up to the advanced and to help
the backward is rising to an ever-greater height. The correct leadership
of the Party's Marxist line enables China's national economy to develop
vigorously through independence and self-reliance. A great leap forward
situation has appeared.

Under the oppression and enslavement of imperialism, feudalism, and
bureaucratic capitalism, the broad laboring people of China were in the
grips of tremendous hardship and suffering. The national economy was at
a standstill. For a long time, many industrial products for daily use
were all imported from foreign countries. A box of now commonplace
matches was called "foreign fire," machine-woven fabrics were called
"foreign cloth," and nails were called "foreign nails." There were also
"foreign umbrellas," "foreign oil," and so forth. Foreign goods flooded
the domestic market, driving out China's domestic industries. This was
what was left behind by old China.

Since liberation, under the wise leadership of the Chinese Communist
Party, the heroic Chinese working class and laboring people have stood
up and are determined to transform the backward old China and construct
a prosperous and strong socialist new China. The basic completion of
socialist revolution in the ownership system of the means of production
and the announcement of the Party's General Line for socialist
construction greatly propel the development of the socialist
construction enterprise. Amid the seething Great Leap Forward national
upsurge, Chairman Mao pointed out: "We cannot follow the old path of
technological development in other countries and crawl slowly along in
others' footsteps. We must break conventions and adopt as much as
possible new technology and build China into a socialist and modern
power within a short historical period. The Great Leap Forward we are
talking about means exactly this."
<a id="19">[[19]](#bot_19)</a>
Under the guidance of the Marxist line formulated by Chairman Mao and
the direction of the policy of national construction on the basis of
independence and selfreliance, the people of the whole country have
developed their own respective industrial sectors. Not only is the field
of light industry complete, it also produces enough for both
self-sufficiency and export. The old days when the streets were full of
imported goods are completely over. China's own machine-building
industry, metallurgical industry, chemical industry, scientific
instruments and meters industry, and electronics industry have rapidly
been established and developed. In the development process of socialist
industry, the lopsided concentration of industry in the maritime
provinces which existed in old China has been changed. New industrial
bases in the interior have been built, thus gradually rationalizing the
location of production capacities and meeting the needs of China's
economic construction and national defense construction. In the practice
of the Three Great Revolutionary Movements, new scientific and technical
manpower has rapidly expanded, and the level of science and technology
is rising continually. Many large pieces of precision equipment and
major projects can now be designed and manufactured by us without
outside help. On this basis, China has exploded atomic and hydrogen
bombs and sent up man-made satellites. China was the first country in
the world to successfully synthesize insulin, making an important
contribution to the inquiry concerning the origin of life. China was the
first country in the world to successfully manufacture a double internal
water-cooling turbogenerator. Under the guidance of Mao Tsetung Thought,
the Chinese people have broken through one after another scientific and
technological barriers and have set new records by leaps and bounds.
With the soaring leap in the development of industry, science, and
technology, China's agricultural mechanization is also rapidly pushing
ahead. Significant achievements have been won in China's farmland water
control construction, and the effective irrigation acreage has greatly
expanded. The "eight-character charter" of soil, fertilizer, water,
seeds, close planting, plant protection, and field management for higher
agricultural output has been widely practiced.

In the development process of China's socialist construction, because of
the sabotage and interference of the revisionist line pushed by the Liu
Shao-ch'i and Lin Piao clique, a certain "hesitation" once appeared for
some time in some sectors. This was a manifestation of
class struggle and the struggle between the two lines in the process of
socialist construction. It is a struggle between progress and
retrogression. Judging from the whole process and from the whole
situation since the establishment of the Republic, China's national
economy has been developing by leaps and bounds under the guidance of
the dominant Marxist line formulated by Chairman Mao. From 1949 to 1970,
China's total value of agricultural production increased by 1.5 times.
The total value of industrial production increased by more than 18
times. Along with the development of industrial and agricultural
production, China's communications and transportation, commerce, money
and finance, and cultural and educational enterprises have also rapidly
advanced. The level of material and cultural life of the people has also
been raised substantially. These indisputable facts cannot be denied by
anyone. The Lin Piao clique vainly attempted to negate the brilliant
achievements obtained by the Chinese people under the illumination of
the General Line by slanderously saying that "the national economy is
stagnant." This merely further exposed their position as agents of
imperialism, revisionism, and reaction, their hatred for socialism, and
their wolfish ambition to restore capitalism.

The brilliance of the Party's basic line for the whole historical stage
of socialism and the General Line for socialist construction illuminates
our big strides forward. Our great socialist motherland is prospering
and progressing. When we look to the future, we feel confident and
expansive. What the Western bourgeoisie failed to do, the Eastern
proletariat must and can achieve!

### _Major Study References_

Lenin, "More on the Trade Union, the Present Situation, and the Errors
of Trotsky and Bukharin."

Stalin, _Socialist Economic Problems of the Soviet Union_.

Chairman Mao, "We Must Pay Attention to Economic Work."

### _Review Problems_

1\. Why do we say that there is still a duality in socialist products and
the socialist production process?

2\. What are the major characteristics and requirements of the basic
economic law of socialism? Why do we say that in order to realize the
purpose of socialist production, it is necessary to correctly handle the
relations between politics and production and between politics and
economics?

3\. How do we carry through the Party's General Line for socialist
construction in our practice?

_Notes_
-------------------

<a id="bot_s_a">[\*](#s_a)</a> To k'uai hao sheng ti fa-chan she-hui-chu-i
sheng-ch'an --- she-hui-chu-i sheng-ch'an ti hsing-chih mu-ti ho ta-tao
mu-ti ti shou-tuan.

<a id="bot_1">[[1]](#1)</a> Engels, _Anti-Diihring, Selected Works of
Marx and Engels_, Vol. 3, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p.
348.

<a id="bot_2">[[2]](#2)</a> Ibid., p. 347.

<a id="bot_3">[[3]](#3)</a> "Instructions (Draft) to the Soviet Organs of
Various Areas by the Labor National Defense Committee," _Complete Works
of Lenin_, Vol. 32, p. 374.

<a id="bot_4">[[4]](#4)</a> "Resolutions on Several Issues concerning the
People's Commune," _Documents of the Sixth Plenum of the Eighth Central
Committee of the Chinese Communist Party_, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1958, p. 19.

<a id="bot_5">[[5]](#5)</a> "How to Organize Competition?" _Selected
Works of Lenin_, Vol. 3, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 393.

<a id="bot_6">[[6]](#6)</a> Marx, _Capital_, Vol. 3, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1966, p. 280.

<a id="bot_7">[[7]](#7)</a> Ibid., p. 272.

<a id="bot_8">[[8]](#8)</a> "May First Day," _Complete Works of
Lenin_, Vol.7, p. 185.

<a id="bot_9">[[9]](#9)</a> _Communist Manifesto, Selected Works of
Marx and Engels_, Vol. 1, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p.
272.

<a id="bot_10">[[10]](#10)</a> "Report to the Second Plenum of the
Seventh Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party," _Selected
Works of Mao Tse-tung_, Vol. 4, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968,
p. 1318.

<a id="bot_11">[[11]](#11)</a> "Eighth Congress of the Whole of Soviet
Russia," _Complete Works of Lenin_, Vol. 31, p. 454.

<a id="bot_12">[[12]](#12)</a> "The Great Innovation,"
_Selected Works of Lenin_, Vol. 4, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she,
1972, p. 16.

<a id="bot_13">[[13]](#13)</a> "On Protracted War," _Selected Works of
Mao Tse-tung_, Vol. 2, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 437.

<a id="bot_14">[[14]](#14)</a> "The Bankruptcy of the Idealist
Interpretation of History," _Selected Works of Mao
Tse-tung_, Vol. 4, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 1401.

<a id="bot_15">[[15]](#15)</a> "On the Correct Handling of Contradictions
among the People," Selected Readings from the Works of Mao Tse-tung,
(Type A), Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1965, pp. 336-37.

<a id="bot_16">[[16]](#16)</a> "The Sacred Clan," _Complete Works of Marx
and Engels_, Vol. 2, p. 104.

<a id="bot_17">[[17]](#17)</a> "On Coalition Government," _Selected Works
of Mao Tsetung_, Vol. 3, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 932.

<a id="bot_18">[[18]](#18)</a> Chairman Mao, "Comments on 'The Party
Secretary Participates Physically, the Whole Party Operates the
Cooperative,'" _Socialist Upsurge in China's Countryside_,
Vol. 1, pp. 5-6.

<a id="bot_19">[[19]](#19)</a> Quoted from _Hung-ch'i_ _(Red
Flag)_, 1965, No. 1.
