[*18* Frugality Is an Important Principle in the Socialist Economy](#) 
=========================================================================================================

[Practice Frugality and Economic
Accounting](#)<a id="s_a">[\*](#bot_s_a)</a>

The socialist production process is one of planned allocation of labor
time and striving to economize on labor time. To practice frugality and
economic accounting in all enterprises and in managing the national
economy is the essential condition for building socialism with greater,
faster, and better results at lower costs.

[Frugality Is a Necessity in Socialist Economic Development](#)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _The Significance of Frugality to Socialist Economic Development_

What frugality means here is the economizing of manpower, materials, and
funds. Economizing manpower means to save live labor; economizing
materials means to save embodied labor; and economizing funds means to
save live and embodied labor manifested in currency circulation.
Therefore, all frugality is in fact the economizing of live and embodied
labor, or the economizing of labor time.

In socialist society, saving labor time assumes an immense
significance. Marx pointed out: "All saving is ultimately the saving of
time. Every person should rationally allocate his own time in order to
gain necessary knowledge or to satisfy the various requirements
governing his activities. Similarly, society should also allocate its
time in order to achieve production that satisfies its total
requirements. Therefore, the saving of time and the planned allocation
of labor time in various production sectors become a primary economic
law of collective production. This is even a very advanced law."
<a id="1">[[1]](#bot_1)</a>

The goal of socialist production is to satisfy the needs of the state
and its people. Frugality in labor time and planned allocation of labor
time over the whole society in order to produce the maximum possible
amount of use value with the minimum amount of labor expenditure is a
basic path to guaranteeing to the greatest extent the satisfaction of
the ever-increasing needs of the state and its people. It is also in
line with the objective requirement of the basic economic law of
socialism. To violate the law of frugality is to violate the basic
requirement of socialist economic development and to violate the basic
interests of the proletariat and the laboring people. Therefore, whether
frugality is enforced is primarily an issue of whether the objective law
of the socialist economy is accepted and an issue of whether the basic
interests of the proletariat and the laboring people are valued.

To practice frugality is an important way to increase accumulation
through self-reliance in the socialist country. To engage in large-scale
economic construction, the socialist country requires a large amount of
capital funds. Where do the funds come from? Unlike capital imperialism
and social imperialism, the socialist country cannot exploit its own
people, engage in external aggression and plundering, demand war
damages, or sell national resources to develop its economy. The
socialist country can only rely on the diligent labor of its whole
laboring people and internal frugality for accumulation. On the one
hand, the production unit saves as much manpower, materials, and funds
as possible, rationally allocates funds, and continuously expands the
scale of production. On the other hand, nonproduction units
such as state organs, military units, schools, and people's
organizations must economize and eliminate waste in order to minimize
the share of nonproduction expenditure in the state budget. This way, a
large amount of capital funds can be accumulated for economic
construction. The socialist country must practice frugality and oppose
waste in order to accelerate socialist construction and better satisfy
the ever-increasing needs of the state and the people.

To practice frugality is especially important to China's socialist
construction. China is a big country but is also an economically
backward and poor country, a developing country. Chairman Mao pointed
out: "We must engage in large-scale construction. But China is still a
very poor country. This is a contradiction. To practice frugality
totally and steadily is one of the methods that will resolve this
contradiction." <a id="2">[[2]](#bot_2)</a>
Therefore, Chairman Mao called upon the whole people: "To run factories
with diligence and economy, to run shops with diligence and thrift, to
run all state enterprises and cooperative enterprises with diligence and
economy, and to run all other enterprises with diligence and thrift. The
principle of diligence and economy must be applied to everything. This,
then, is the principle of frugality."
<a id="3">[[3]](#bot_3)</a> The broad workers
and poor and lower-middle peasants fighting at the forefront of
production pay close attention to Chairman Mao's instructions. They
understand the major significance of frugality. The laboring masses put
it nicely, "Diligence without economy means pure waste of effort." Only
through diligence and thrift can the laboring masses create wealth and
play the greatest possible role and can China soon be developed into a
big and strong socialist country.

To practice frugality is also necessary if a socialist country is to
discharge its obligations related to internationalism. Only by saving
more can we contribute more to world revolution.

Chairman Mao pointed out: "Our 600 million people must all increase
production, practice frugality, and oppose ostentatious display and
waste. This is not only economically significant, but also politically
significant."
<a id="4">[[4]](#bot_4)</a>
Diligence and frugality have always been the virtue of the proletariat
and the laboring people. Under the guidance of Chairman Mao's
revolutionary line, the broad masses of China practice diligence and
frugality. It has developed into a common habit. Ostentatious display
and waste are the poison of the bourgeoisie and all exploitative
classes. Like their master Confucius, the Liu Shao-ch'i and Lin Piao
clique were all people who "never worked with \[their\] four limbs and
\[who\] could not distinguish the five cereals." Extravagance and waste
are the innate nature of the exploitative class. They hated the policy
of "building the country with diligence and economy" formulated by
Chairman Mao. In capital construction work, they went after "the big,
the foreign, and the glamorous "projects. In resource management, they
resorted to what was nominally known as "generous budget but tight
expenditure." In fact, it was "generous budget and generous
expenditure." In operation and management, they even clamored that
"money will not escape abroad even if accounts are not reckoned for
three years." Their criminal intent was to corrode those people among
the revolutionary ranks who were irresolute, waste national resources,
undermine socialism, sabotage proletarian dictatorship, and restore
capitalism. Therefore, to practice frugality and oppose waste will not
only accelerate socialist construction, but will also represent a
powerful political struggle against people like Liu Shao-ch'i and Lin
Piao. It is also a thorough criticism and repudiation of traditional
concepts and established influence. We must consciously resist the
corrosion and attacks of bourgeois ideology and extend the glorious
tradition of the proletariat to establish new enterprises with ardor and
to practice diligence and economy. "We must make all youths realize that
our country is still very poor and that it is not possible to
fundamentally change this condition in a short time. We must rely on the
youth and the whole people to unite and struggle during several decades
and create a rich and strong country with our own hands."
<a id="5">[[5]](#bot_5)</a>

### _The Socialist System Opens a Broad Avenue to Frugality_

In socialist society, there is not only a need for practicing frugality,
but also a possibility for rationally and widely achieving
frugality with respect to live and embodied labor on
various battlefronts and in each individual sector of socialist
production. This is chiefly because the laboring people in socialist
society have become their own masters. The ultimate purpose of saving as
much manpower, material resources, and funds as possible in order to
provide more accumulation for the state and the collective and to better
expand reproduction is to serve the interests of the proletariat and the
laboring people. Therefore, practicing frugality is a conscious
objective of the broad masses of laboring people. Once the socialist
activism of the masses has been mobilized, all methods for frugality are
employed: Warehouses and storehouses are inventoried to tap potential
material resources; technical innovations are made in a big way to tap
the potential of unused equipment; labor organization and methods of
operation are improved to tap labor potential; and comprehensive
utilization is unfolded to turn "waste" into valuable items and
transform "the useless" into the useful. For example, the main plant of
Northeast Pharmaceuticals mobilized the masses to unfold comprehensive
utilization. The broad laboring masses and technicians all taxed their
brains to find ways to use "solid waste," "fluid waste," and "gaseous
waste." As a result, several tens of new products were added. The main
distillery in Peking formerly produced only liquor. After unfolding a
mass movement to increase production and practice economy, several tens
of important products were produced from the "three wastes" of the
plant. It developed a comprehensive enterprise, turning out a great
variety of products. The broad laboring masses are concerned with
frugality and practice it in thousands of ways. This is not possible in
a capitalist society. Under capitalism, the capitalist practices
frugality in his own enterprise. The purpose is to minimize costs and
extract maximum surplus value. The essence of frugality is to increase
the exploitation of hired labor. Marx pointed out: "Capitalist
production economizes the labor that is realized and embodied in
commodities. But, capitalism is more wasteful of man and live labor than
any other production method. It not only wastes blood and flesh, but
also mind and brain."
<a id="6">[[6]](#bot_6)</a> The
working masses are extremely resentful of the so-called frugality
practiced by the capitalist and will resolutely resist and rebel against
it.

Under the conditions of socialist public ownership, the law of frugality
not only plays a role within various enterprises; more importantly, it
plays a role in the whole national economy. The socialist economy is a
planned economy. "The social and planned allocation of labor time
regulates the proper proportion among various labor functions and
various needs." <a id="7">[[7]](#bot_7)</a> The
socialist country can, through the national economic plan, rationally
use manpower, material resources, and funds, centrally organize
production and circulation, unfold socialist cooperation over the whole
country, and combine the frugality of individual enterprises with the
frugality of the whole society. Under capitalism, because of competition
among enterprises and chaotic production, it is basically not possible
to practice frugality in a systematic manner throughout the whole
society. This is especially so because of the serious waste of manpower,
material resources, and funds connected with the periodic occurrence of
business cycles. Marx pointed out: "The capitalist production method
forces individual enterprises to practice frugality. But its chaotic
competitive system results in substantial waste in social means of
production and labor power."
<a id="8">[[8]](#bot_8)</a>

Frugality and waste constitute a unity of opposites. The process of
practicing frugality must inevitably be the process of opposing waste.
To practice frugality, it is first necessary to strengthen the masses'
and cadres' education concerning ideology and the political line,
continuously unfold the struggle against waste, and establish the idea
of building the country with diligence and economy and arduous struggle.
The Party's ideological and political work is the basic guarantee that
the consciousness of the masses and the cadres to practice frugality
will be raised and the policy of running enterprises with diligence and
economy will be carried out. To combine ideological and political work
with meticulous economic work, a rational system must be established. To
strengthen economic accounting in the national economy and in various
enterprises and to run the enterprises on the basis of
economic accounting is a very important system.

[Economic Accounting Is an Important Means to Develop the Socialist Economy with Greater, Faster, and Better Results at Lower Costs](#)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _Use Economic Accounting to Realize Greater, Faster, and Better Results at Lower Costs_

Economic accounting is the analysis of economic activities through
bookkeeping. In the production struggle, people learned a long time ago
the importance of economic accounting. In the primitive commune of India
there was a bookkeeper to record agricultural accounts and all events
connected with them.
<a id="9">[[9]](#bot_9)</a> Marx borrowed the
story of Robinson Crusoe, popular among bourgeois economists, to explain
the necessity of bookkeeping in the production process. Marx pointed
out: For Robinson, who lived on an isolated island, "however simple his
life, he had to satisfy his various needs. As a result, he had to engage
in a variety of useful labor, such as making tools, furniture, raising
goats, catching fish, and hunting animals." "He had to force himself to
precisely allocate his time for various activities." "His accounts
recorded various things that he possessed, various activities required
to produce these things, and finally the average labor time expended to
make these quantities of products."
<a id="10">[[10]](#bot_10)</a> The more social
the production process becomes, the greater the necessity for economic
accounting. "Bookkeeping is more necessary to capitalist production than
to the decentralized production of handicraftsmen and peasants. It is
more necessary for production under public ownership than for capitalist
production." <a id="11">[[11]](#bot_11)</a>

Under different social systems, the content, format, and social
consequences of economic accounting are different. In capitalist
society, the capitalist uses economic accounting to extract the greatest
possible amount of surplus value with the smallest possible
amount of capital. The stricter this economic accounting, the more
capital is saved, the more cruel is the exploitation of hired labor, and
the poorer the laboring people become. In socialist society, economic
accounting no longer reflects capitalist production relations. Rather,
it reflects socialist production relations. Through economic accounting,
the proletariat and the laboring people consciously employ the law of
saving labor time to develop socialist production with greater, faster,
and better results at lower costs and to better satisfy the needs of the
state and the people.

Greater, faster, and better results at lower costs are important
characteristics of socialist production. Socialist economic accounting
is an important means to realize greater, faster, and better results at
lower costs. Looking at it from the whole national economy, greater,
faster, and better results at lower costs are inseparable. In
production, if frugality is practiced to reduce consumption of raw
materials, fuel, labor, and costs, the same amount of manpower, material
resources, and funds can produce more products. At the same time,
meticulous calculation, diligence and economy, the rational choice of
raw materials, and the substitution of cheaper and better raw materials
for more expensive and poorer quality raw materials can also lead to an
increase in production by raising the quality of products and improving
the durability of products. The manpower, material resources, and funds
thus saved can be used to develop production of other items to
accelerate socialist construction.

The bourgeoisie tries its best to extract the greatest possible amount
of surplus value by using the smallest amount of capital. Soviet
revisionism regards the pursuit of profit as the highest principle of
economic accounting. Profits in the enterprises of Soviet revisionist
state monopoly capitalism are a transformation of surplus value.
Economic accounting in capital imperialism and social imperialism is the
economic accounting of the exploitative class. It is diametrically
opposed to socialist economic accounting.

### _The Laboring Masses Are the Masters of Economic Accounting_

The position of the laboring masses in socialist economic accounting and
capitalist economic accounting is entirely different. Because economic
accounting in the capitalist enterprise serves the bourgeoisie but is
fundamentally opposed to the interests of the laboring people, economic
accounting is the business of only a few experts employed by the
bourgeoisie. Socialist economic accounting serves the interests of the
laboring people and is in line with their basic interests. Therefore,
economic accounting in the socialist enterprise is not merely the work
of experts, but should and can become an economic activity which has the
conscious participation of the laboring masses.

Economic accounting in China's socialist enterprise combines the
laboring masses and the experts. China's experience demonstrates that to
do a good job in economic accounting, the masses must participate.
Economic accounting by experts must be based on mass accounting. Because
the broad laboring masses have rich practical experience gained from
fighting a long battle on the production forefront, they are familiar
with their own production conditions. They know clearly where waste
exists and where frugality can be further increased. They know very well
how to improve techniques to raise efficiency, and how to calculate
labor costs, material resources, and funds in order to achieve greater,
faster, and better results at lower costs. Group accounting,
organizations for economic supervision, and conferences to analyze
economic activities in China's socialist enterprises are some of the
better forms of economic accounting activities resulting from the masses
taking control of financial management and the combination of the
laboring masses and the experts. In the socialist enterprise, the
masses, as their own masters, participate in group accounting, analysis
of economic activities, and financial management. This way, not only
does economic accounting play a greater role in realizing greater,
faster, and better results at lower costs, but it also presses the
leadership personnel and the broad cadres to act according
to the Party line and general and specific policies so that
the enterprise will advance along the socialist road.

In socialist economic accounting, it is also important to exercise the
role of the experts. Keeping in touch with the various workshops and
departments in the enterprise makes the experts more familiar with the
situation of the economic activities of the whole enterprise and
facilitates the leadership and organization of the various economic
activities. Of course, the experts must also go down to the production
forefront, fully rely on the masses, strengthen investigation and
research, respect the creativity of the masses, and promptly solve
problems of economic accounting arising in the process of production.
Only thus can their proper role be fully exercised.

[The System of Economic Accounting Is a Management System of the Socialist Enterprise](#)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _The System of Economic Accounting Embodies the Relations between the State and State Enterprises and the Relations among Enterprises_

After the socialist country establishes a socialist state economy, how
should the state enterprise be managed?

The socialist state economy based on the socialist state ownership
system is the property of the whole laboring people. The socialist state
possesses and manages the state economy as the representative of the
whole laboring people. The socialist state stipulates production and
operational plan assignments for the state enterprise and centrally
allocates the output and earnings of the state enterprise to meet the
needs of the state and the people.

Does state management of the state economy imply that there is no
relative economic independence in the many state enterprises? Does this
mean that all means of production and compensation for personnel are
provided free to the state enterprise, that all products of the state
enterprise are passed on to the state without any compensation, and that
there is no independent accounting of profit or loss in the
state enterprise? This kind of management system existed in history and
is called the free supply system in enterprise management. In the 1918
to 1920 period of military communism in the Soviet Union, this system of
management of state enterprises was adopted. It was necessary under the
special historical condition of military communism. But it is not
practicable under the general conditions of building socialism. Under
the condition of a free supply system, the absence of an independent
accounting of profit and loss would make it difficult to detect where
efficiencies or waste existed in the process of production and
operation. Thus, it would be unfavorable to mobilizing the operation
activism and strengthening the responsibility of the working personnel
of the state enterprise. This would be in contradiction to the law of
frugality.

Then, is it all right to let state enterprises be independently
responsible for their profits and losses? This is even less practicable.
If this were the case, the socialist state ownership system could exist
only in name and would degenerate into an enterprise ownership system, a
small group ownership system, and ultimately a private ownership system.
The economic law of capitalism would certainly exert itself.

In socialist society, the economic management of enterprises by the
state objectively requires a system such as the system of economic
accounting. What is the economic accounting system? In simple terms, it
is an economic management system which guarantees the central leadership
of the state and at the same time permits the relatively independent
operation of enterprises.

As early as 1942, Chairman Mao brought up the principle of
"centralization in leadership, and decentralization in management" in
his directive to establish an economic accounting system in all state
sectors of the economy. Centralized leadership means planned management
of state enterprises according to centralized lines, directives, and
policies and, in the light of concrete conditions, assigning enterprises
various production targets including variety, quantity, quality, product
value, labor productivity, costs, and profits to be turned
over to the state. The enterprise must be responsible for the state plan
and fulfill the various targets assigned by the state. Decentralized
management means state allocation of funds to state enterprises
according to their production and operational needs. Enterprises use
funds allocated by the state and organize production, supply, and
marketing activities according to the plan assignments set up by the
state. Every state enterprise possesses some relative independence. It
is responsible for its own profit and losses and relies on its own
income to pay for its expenses and to furnish accumulation to the state.
Decentralized management under centralized state leadership requires, on
the one hand, that the state enterprise improve management of production
and operation, strengthen economic accounting, and guarantee the
fulfillment of the state plan. On the other hand, the state must create
the necessary conditions for the state enterprise to improve production
and operation, such as the prompt announcement of production plans and
the proper organization of raw materials supply and production
cooperation. The management of the state enterprise by the state through
the economic accounting system guarantees centralized leadership by the
state over state enterprises and also facilitates the enterprise's
exercise of socialist operational activism. It both avoids excessive
control unfavorable to enterprise economic accounting and prevents
excessive enterprise independence which may lead to the capitalist
tendency of free operation.

Under the system of economic accounting, the characteristic feature of
the economic relations among state enterprises is joint cooperation but
independent accounting. State enterprises are the property of the
proletariat and the whole laboring people. They belong to the same
owners. They are related not only by the division of labor, but also by
the fact that their identical basic interests require them to coordinate
and closely cooperate on their own initiative. They are fundamentally
different from capitalist enterprises based on the private ownership
system. However, under the system of economic accounting, state
enterprises are all units with relatively independent accounting and
independent operation. Economic transactions and
cooperation among them must be recorded to facilitate the calculation of
economic benefits. The exchange of manpower, material resources, and
funds among enterprises must therefore be inspired by the cooperative
style of communism and follow the principle of equivalent exchange.

The above-mentioned relations between the state and state enterprises
and among state enterprises under the system of economic accounting
enable the state enterprises to fully exercise their operation
responsibility and activism under the centralized leadership of the
state. Lenin once pointed out: "The purpose of establishing enterprises
on the basis of an economic accounting system is to make them
responsible, and totally responsible, so that the enterprises will not
run at a loss." <a id="12">[[12]](#bot_12)</a>
Some people wonder, since all state enterprises are state property, why
it is necessary to have such a refined accounting system among them.
This idea, which negates the system of economic accounting, violates the
socialist principle of frugality. In socialist society, increases in
production and the practice of economy rely primarily on the Party's
ideological and political work to raise the consciousness of the cadres
and the masses. But it is also necessary to establish a system of
responsibility with respect to operation and management. If the system
of economic accounting were not implemented, it would not be favorable
to strengthening the operational responsibility of the management
personnel, and substantial waste of manpower, material resources, and
funds would result.

Corresponding with the duality in the socialist production process, the
state enterprise must, in its process of economic accounting, calculate
output, variety, and quality in light of their use value. It must also
calculate costs, prices, profits, and so forth in light of their
exchange value. Plan targets assigned by the state to state enterprises
in its management through the system of economic accounting include
product variety, specifications, quantity, quality, and other material
targets as well as the value targets such as costs, output value, and
surrendered profits. Material targets and value targets are
complementary and necessary. But, the existence of value
categories indicates the existence of commodity production and the
existence of contradictions between use value and exchange value in
commodities. The proletariat must develop production to satisfy the
needs of the socialist state and the people according to the
requirements of the basic socialist economic law. They must correctly
handle the contradictions between use value and exchange value and
realize greater, faster, and better results at lower costs throughout
the whole economy. The agents of the bourgeoisie in the socialist
economy will certainly exploit the contradictions between use value and
exchange value to push the revisionist line of "producing more if
profits are high and less if profits are low; don't produce if there are
no profits" and conspire to restore capitalism. Therefore, the process
of implementing the system of economic accounting will be full of the
struggle between the two classes, the two roads, and the two lines. To
win victory in this struggle, we must correctly understand and use the
various value categories in the system of economic accounting.

### _Correctly Use the Value System to Do a Good Job in the System of Economic Accounting_

Capital funds, production costs, profits, and other value categories in
the socialist economic accounting system reflect socialist production
relations. They are essentially different from capital funds, production
costs, profits, and other categories in the capitalist economy.

Capital funds in the socialist state enterprise are state property and
are fundamentally different from capital in the capitalist enterprise.
Capital is created by surplus value and reflects the exploitative
relations of capital over hired labor. Capital funds in the socialist
state enterprise are that part of the accumulated state wealth used for
production and operation. The use of these funds by the enterprise to
engage in production and operational activities follows the requirements
of the basic socialist economic law and serves to expand reproduction
and satisfy the ever-increasing needs of the state and the
people. The rational use of capital funds has tremendous significance in
developing the socialist economy.

The production funds of the state enterprise can be classified as fixed
capital and working capital according to the nature of their circulation
in the production process. The material form of fixed capital funds is
manifested by machines, plants, and so forth. The full exploitation of
fixed capital assets is equivalent to the expansion of production
capacity with a given amount of fixed assets. The state must stipulate a
rational depreciation method and depreciation rate for fixed assets for
the state enterprise (including visible and invisible depreciation) in
order to ensure a continuous replacement of the fixed assets of the
enterprise and permit necessary technical innovation. This is a
necessary economic condition for the enterprise to maintain simple
reproduction and a certain degree of expanded reproduction. The state
also allocates to state enterprises a certain amount of working capital
for their own use. If their needs exceed their allocated quota, they can
borrow funds from the state bank. This is instrumental in urging the
enterprises to accelerate the turnover of working capital and
continuously reduce the ratio between production and funds (the amount
of working capital funds required for each 100 yuan of production)
through the correct calculation of the inventory quota of various
materials and goods and the consumption quota of raw materials and fuel
per unit output, and reduction of the production cycle, the improvement
of production and marketing work, and other means.

The production cost of socialist products and the production cost of
capitalist products are two essentially different economic categories.
Capitalist production cost is capital consumption. The reduction of
production costs in a capitalist enterprise indicates capital saving and
the intensification of labor exploitation. Production costs in a
socialist enterprise are expenses connected with the production of a
certain amount of products. Because enterprises under the economic
accounting system have to depend on income from the sale of products to
pay for their expenses and to obtain profits, the
continuous reduction of production costs indicates the saving of labor
time and higher labor productivity. More accumulation is thus available
to the state or the collective. The role of cost reduction in socialist
construction can be gauged by the following figures: According to 1972
data, every 1 percent reduction in total costs in China's industrial
enterprises amounted to enough capital investment for three Yangtze
River bridges in Nanking.

Profits in socialist state enterprises are essentially different from
profits in capitalist enterprises. Capitalist profits consist of
transformed surplus value expropriated by the capitalist. Profits in
socialist enterprises are the net social income created by the laboring
masses. They are concentrated in the hands of the state through
surrendered profits and taxes and are mainly used to expand socialist
production and improve the people's livelihood.

Profits in the socialist economy can also be looked at from the
viewpoint of the whole national economy. Under certain conditions, the
socialist state can allow some enterprises to just break even or even to
run at losses. For example, some interior and local industrial
enterprises established to effect a more rational geographical
distribution may not be making profits for the time being because of
unfavorable conditions. But, the development of these industries is
favorable to the long-term interests of the national economy and the
establishment of a strategic, strong, and stable hinterland. Therefore,
even though these enterprises do not make any profit for the time being,
the state still supports their development. Another example is that some
enterprises producing certain products, especially new products, new
materials, and products which support agriculture, may run at losses
within a certain period of time. But the development of these products
is instrumental in industrial construction and agricultural production.
Temporary and planned losses can be allowed for the interests of the
whole national economy and to consolidate the worker-peasant alliance.
Needless to say, the enterprise must mobilize the masses to actively
reduce production costs by improving production techniques
and labor productivity and change losses into profits. These profits
from the viewpoint of the whole national economy are called "advanced
profits." These advanced profits embody the superiority of the socialist
system. Of course, this does not mean that profits in industrial
enterprises and sectors are no longer important and losses can be
legitimately made because of poor operation on the part of individual
enterprises. Profits of the whole national economy are ultimately based
on profits from individual enterprises and sectors. Therefore,
enterprises suffering temporary losses should try hard to improve
operation, reduce production costs, reduce losses, and turn losses into
profits to provide more accumulation to the state.

Profits from socialist state enterprises are the main source of
socialist accumulation. The socialist enterprise must criticize and
repudiate putting "profits in command" on the one hand and oppose
erroneous ideas that pay no attention to costs, profits, and increasing
accumulation for the state on the other.

Having "profits in command" puts the achievement of the highest possible
profits in the primary position. Production is guided only by profit.
Production plan assignments from the state are ignored. This is a
capitalist principle of operation and must be criticized and repudiated.
Under the socialist system, because of different production conditions
and supply-demand conditions, state plan prices may not always be
identical with the value of products. Other things being equal, when the
product price is higher than the value, profits are higher. If the
reverse is true, profits are lower. If state enterprises violate plan
targets set by the state with respect to quantity and variety and expand
production of products with high production value and high profits and
reduce production of products with small production value and low
profits, this is a manifestation of putting "profits in command." The
"total economic accounting system" implemented by the Soviet revisionist
renegade clique to put profits in command is an important measure to
restore capitalism. The essence of the "total economic accounting
system" is the thoroughly capitalistic principle of profits. In the
"total economic accounting system," "the most important
summary indicators of enterprise finance are profits and the profit
rate." To a very large extent, the enterprise can determine the variety
and quantity of production according to the size of expected profits. To
increase profits, the enterprise can dismiss workers and increase labor
intensity to "reduce production costs." This "total economic accounting
system" that puts profits in command is an exploitative system imposed
on the laboring people of the Soviet Union by the Soviet revisionist
bureaucratic monopoly bourgeoisie.

The socialist state enterprise must also make profits. But there is no
similarity to having profits in command. The socialist state enterprise
only allows socialist profits to be increased by following the Party's
line and general and specific policies, fulfilling the assignments
specified by the state plan, and increasing production and practicing
economy with proletarian politics in command.

Through increasing production and practicing economy, the socialist
state enterprise increases profits and provides more accumulation to the
state. In this way, it contributes to socialist revolution and socialist
construction. Revenue from state enterprises (surrendered profits,
taxes, and so forth) represents more than 90 percent of the revenue in
China's state budget. If the enterprise cannot actively increase
accumulation for the state, or even suffers unnecessary losses, revenue
in the state budget will be reduced, thus adversely affecting socialist
revolution and construction and the discharge of the obligations to
internationalism.

In summary, the state's implementation of management by means of the
economic accounting system in state enterprises is for the purpose of
better realizing this directive of Chairman Mao: "Any socialist economic
enterprise should pay attention to utilizing manpower and equipment as
fully as possible, improving labor organization as much as possible,
improving operations and management and raising labor productivity,
economizing all manpower and material resources that can be economized,
and adopting labor competition and economic accounting to
reduce costs and increase personal income and accumulation year after
year." <a id="13">[[13]](#bot_13)</a>

### _Strengthen Management with the Economic Accounting System in the Rural People's Communes_

The means of production and labor power under the socialist collective
ownership system belong to individual collective organizations of the
laboring people. Each collective economic organization is an accounting
unit. It organizes production under the direction of the state plan and
sells commodities according to prices set by the state. It operates
independently and is responsible for its profits and losses. Production
and income distribution are carried on within the collective. At the
same time, accumulation is provided to the state through taxes. The
socialist national economy is a unified whole. The unified national
economic plan drawn up by the state includes the state economy as well
as the collective economy.

It is necessary to practice economic accounting not only in the
management of state enterprises but also in the sector of the collective
economy because it will strengthen the economic accounting system and
consolidate and promote the development of the collective economy.

China's socialist economy under the collective ownership system of the
laboring masses exists in agriculture, industry (including the
handicraft industry), transportation, and commerce. But it is most
important in agriculture. Here we are mainly concerned with the problem
of strengthening management by means of the economic accounting system
in the collective economy of the rural people's commune.

China's rural people's commune at present uses the three level ownership
system of the commune, the production brigade, and the production team.
The commune, the brigade, and the production team are all accounting
units which operate independently and are responsible for their profits
and losses. Financial transactions among the commune, the production
brigade, and the production team and the allocation of material
resources and labor power must be based on the principle of
"equivalent exchange on a voluntary and mutually profitable basis."

In the economy of the rural people's commune under the collective
ownership system, management by means of the economic accounting system
is implemented in commune-operated enterprises by the commune and in
brigade-operated enterprises by the brigade. The commune and the brigade
exercise unified leadership over their respective enterprises, allocate
a certain amount of capital funds to each enterprise, demand that they
use these funds in a responsible way to fulfill the production plan
assignments given to them by the state, the commune, and the brigade,
and require them to discharge their expenses with their incomes and
fulfill or overfulfill the accumulation assignments set by the commune
and the brigade. With the development of commune- and brigade-operated
enterprises and with the development of the collective economy at
various levels, more and more units within the people's commune are
adopting management by the economic accounting system, and management by
the economic accounting system must be further strengthened.

The production team is a basic accounting unit which operates
independently. The collective fund of the production team is not
allocated by the production brigade or the commune. It comes from the
contribution and accumulation of the members. The commune and the
brigade should lead, help, and support the production team to develop
the collective economy. They cannot use the funds of the production team
to develop the commune or brigade economies. Between the production
brigade and the production team, there does not exist a relationship of
management by the economic accounting system. This is to say, the
production brigade is not ultimately responsible for profits or losses
incurred by the production team. The teams themselves are responsible
for their own profits and losses.

Although there does not exist a relationship of management by the
economic accounting system among the commune, the production brigade,
and the production team, the production team must also
adopt economic accounting. Economic accounting in the production team
consists primarily of calculating the annual consumption of embodied and
live labor in production, accounting for annual income and expenses,
reducing expenses and costs, avoiding nonproduction labor and other
expenditures, and firmly opposing careless expenses and waste.
Especially important is the establishment of a sound system of financial
management. All financial expenditures must be subject to the required
approval procedure. Democracy in financial matters must be practiced.
All incoming and outgoing items must be announced monthly to the
members. People must have separate responsibilities for food grain,
material resources, money, and accounts to prevent excessive
consumption, theft, and losses. Once economic accounting is strengthened
and the system of financial management is improved, production costs can
be reduced, the accumulation of production funds and members' income can
be increased, and the broad members will love the collective economy all
the more and will struggle for further consolidation and development of
the collective economy and oppose spontaneous capitalist tendencies.

### _Major Study References_

Marx, Engels, Lenin, and Stalin on Communist Society, Chapter 7.

Chairman Mao, "Comments on 'To Run a Cooperative with Diligence and
Economy.' "

Chairman Mao, "On the Correct Handling of Contradictions among the
People," Section 11.

### _Review Problems_

1\. Why do we say that only socialist society is capable of practicing
total frugality?

2\. What are the effects of adopting management by the economic
accounting system on building the socialist economy with greater,
faster, and better results at lower costs?

3\. How can the issue of profits in the socialist economy be
correctly handled?

_Notes_
-------------------

<a id="bot_s_a">[\*](#s_a)</a> Chieh-yiieh shih she-hui-chu-i ching-chi ti
chung-yao yuantse --- li-hsing chieh-yúeh ho ching-chi ho-suan-chih.

<a id="bot_1">[[1]](#1)</a> Marx, "'Money': One of the 1857-1858
Manuscripts on Economics," quoted from _Marx, Engels, Lenin, and Stalin
on Communist Society, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she_, 1958, p. 67.

<a id="bot_2">[[2]](#2)</a> "On the Correct Handling of Contradictions
among the People," _Selected Readings from the Works of Mao
Tse-tung_, (Type A), Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1965, p. 360.

<a id="bot_3">[[3]](#3)</a> Chairman Mao, "Comments on 'To Run a
Cooperative with Diligence and Economy,'" _Socialist Upsurge in China's
Countryside_, Vol. 1, p. 16.

<a id="bot_4">[[4]](#4)</a> "On the Correct Handling of Contradictions
among the People," _Selected Readings from the Works of Mao
Tse-tung_, (Type A), Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1965, p. 361.

<a id="bot_5">[[5]](#5)</a> Ibid., p. 348.

<a id="bot_6">[[6]](#6)</a> Marx, _Capital_, Vol. 3, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1966, p. 78

<a id="bot_7">[[7]](#7)</a> Marx, _Capital_, Vol. 1,
_Complete Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 23, p. 96.

<a id="bot_8">[[8]](#8)</a> Ibid., p. 579.

<a id="bot_9">[[9]](#9)</a> Ibid., p. 396.

<a id="bot_10">[[10]](#10)</a> Ibid., pp. 93-94.

<a id="bot_11">[[11]](#11)</a> Marx, _Capital_, Vol. 2,
_Complete Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 24, p. 152.

<a id="bot_12">[[12]](#12)</a> "To the People's Committee on Finance,"
_Complete Works of Lenin_, Vol. 35, p. 549.

<a id="bot_13">[[13]](#13)</a> Chairman Mao, "Comments on 'The Experience
of the Li-tzu-yuan Agricultural Production Cooperative of Chen-ju
District in Reducing Production Expenses,'" _Socialist Upsurge in
China's Countryside_, Vol. 2, p. 768.
