[*12* Socialist Society Ushers in a New Era in Human History](#) 
===================================================================================================

[Socialist Society and Proletarian
Dictatorship](#)<a id="s_a">[\*](#b_s_a)</a>

More than a hundred years ago, Marx and Engels, the teachers of the
worldwide proletarian revolution, analyzed the emergence, development,
and decline of capitalist production relations and concluded
scientifically that the proletariat would certainly overthrow the
bourgeoisie and all exploiting classes, that proletarian dictatorship
would certainly replace bourgeois dictatorship, that socialism would
certainly replace capitalism, and that communism would certainly be
realized in the end. They called on the proletariat of the world to
unite with the broad laboring masses and take up arms to struggle
fearlessly for the demolition of bourgeois state machinery, the
establishment of proletarian dictatorship, and the realization of
socialism and communism. In the past hundred years and more, the
proletariat of the world has marched forward persistently under the
brilliance of Marxism without fearing sacrifice. They have turned the
scientific socialist ideal into a shining reality over a large area of
the world. "The socialist system will finally replace the capitalist
system. This is an objective law not subject to the change of human
will." <a id="1">[[1]](#bot_1)</a>
The socialist society under proletarian dictatorship and established
through violent revolution is a fundamental negation of the exploitative
capitalist system and all exploitative systems. It ushers in a new era
of human history.

[Proletarian Revolution and Proletarian Dictatorship Are the Preconditions for the Emergence of Socialist Production Relations](#)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _Socialist Production Relations Cannot Emerge within the Capitalist Society_

The transition from one societal form to another in human society is
impelled by the basic social contradiction, namely, the contradiction
between the production relations and the productive forces and between
the superstructure and the economic substructure. Marx pointed out:
"Once the material productive force of a society develops to a certain
stage, it comes into conflict with the existing production relations or
property relations (this is merely legal terminology for production
relations). These relations become fetters impeding the productive
forces because of the form in which the productive forces have
developed. Then the time for socialist revolution has arrived. With the
change in the economic substructure, the whole massive superstructure
will undergo changes at varying speed." "The newer and higher production
relations will never emerge before the material conditions suitable for
their existence fully ripen in the embryo of the old society."
<a id="2">[[2]](#bot_2)</a> The material
conditions for socialist production relations --- socialized production
and the proletariat acting as the gravediggers of capitalism ---
steadily develop under capitalist conditions. When capitalism develops
into imperialism, the death knell of capitalism is sounded, and the time
for proletarian socialist revolution has come.

We already know that in human history, slavery, feudalism, and
capitalism are all exploitative systems based on private ownership of
the means of production. The replacement of one of these three social
and economic systems by another always takes the form of a new private
ownership system replacing an old private ownership system.
Under these conditions, new production relations can gradually emerge
within the old society. For example, capitalist production relations
emerged gradually at the end of the feudal society. Even under these
conditions, a new private ownership system, in order to become a
dominant economic basis of society, must rely on the newly emerging
exploitative class which represents this private ownership system to
launch revolutions, seize political power, and engage in life and death
class struggle. This is a time-tested law.

Socialist production relations are production relations based on public
ownership. They cannot possibly emerge within the capitalist society.
The socialist public ownership system is fundamentally opposed to the
capitalist ownership system in which the means of production are
privately owned. To implement the socialist public ownership system of
the means of production implies the expropriation of the bourgeoisie's
means of production. This cannot be carried out in the capitalist
society under bourgeois dictatorship. The bourgeois state machinery and
its whole superstructure exist for the protection of the capitalist
private ownership system. The bourgeoisie will never allow socialist
production relations to emerge from within the capitalist society. All
fallacious arguments that "capitalism can peacefully pass into
socialism" championed by new and old revisionists are totally contrary
to the facts. These are "theories "which serve to preserve the
capitalist system and and forbid the proletariat to rise up and rebel.
With the development of capitalism, the path to complete societal
revolutionary transformation is clear. It is: "The proletariat seizes
political power in the state and first of all converts the means of
production into state property."
<a id="3">[[3]](#bot_3)</a>

The fundamental issue of revolution is political power. Chairman Mao
pointed out that "political power comes from the barrel of a gun."
<a id="4">[[4]](#bot_4)</a> Only
by over throwing the bourgeois state machinery and
establishingproletarian dictatorship through revolutionary violence can
the proletariat establish and develop production relations based on
socialist public ownership after socialist nationalization of the
capitalist economy and socialist transformation of the individual
economy. Thus, proletarian revolution and proletarian dictatorship
become the preconditions for the emergence of socialist production
relations.

The Paris Commune of 1871 was the historically significant debut of the
proletariat overthrowing the capitalist system with revolutionary
violence. Although the Paris Commune failed, the principle of a commune
survived. The Paris Commune experience demonstrated that the proletariat
must destroy the bourgeois state machinery, that is to say, "it is
impossible to simply grasp the existing state machinery and use it to
achieve one's
purpose."<a id="5">[[5]](#bot_5)</a>

Lenin's leadership in the October Revolution was a brilliant
implementation of the Marxist theory of violent revolution. The October
Revolution experience demonstrated that in the period of imperialism and
proletarian revolution, as long as there is a sizable proletariat, as
long as there are masses suffering under oppression, and as long as
there is a mature proletarian party which is capable of formulating a
Marxist line based on the national revolutionary conditions and which is
able to correctly lead the proletariat, the poor, and the suffering
peasants by uniting all forces that can be united to wage a persistent
struggle against the class enemy, it is possible to overthrow bourgeois
rule through armed revolution even in the most backward capitalist
country and thereby establish a socialist country under proletarian
dictatorship.

The cannon fired in the October Revolution has brought the Chinese
people Marxism-Leninism. The great Chairman Mao formulated a general
line for China's new democratic revolution by combining the universal
truth of Marxism-Leninism and China's revolutionary situation. The
general line was: "It will be a revolution led by the proletariat, of
the people, and opposed to imperialism, feudalism, and bureaucratic
capitalism."
<a id="6">[[6]](#bot_6)</a> Under
the guidance of this revolutionary line, the path of establishing
strongholds in the countryside and the rural areas and besieging, and
finally seizing, the urban areas was followed. After a prolonged period
of revolutionary war, the Chinese people overthrew the reactionary rule
of imperialism, feudalism, and bureaucratic capitalism, demolished the
old state machinery, and established the People's Republic of China
under democratic dictatorship, that is, proletarian dictatorship. The
birth of the People's Republic of China was another great event in world
history after the October Revolution.

The experience of the Chinese revolution demonstrated that in the period
of imperialism and proletarian revolution, if the proletariat of
the-colonial and semicolonial countries could only seriously combine the
universal truth of Marxism-Leninism with the actual revolutionary
conditions of their countries, firmly grasp the leadership power of
democratic revolution, and lead the people to victory in this
revolution, it was entirely possible to enter the stage of socialist
revolution immediately after completing the anti-imperialism and
antifeudalism task.

The triumphs of the October Revolution and the socialist revolution in
China are the great victories of the Marxist theory of armed revolution.
New and old revisionists always maliciously attack armed revolutions.
They champion the fallacy of "peaceful transition," which is nothing but
a replica of the "principles of magnanimity" preached by the philosopher
Confucius, a spokesman for the then decadent slave-owning class in
China. \[Editor's note: Confucius's principles of magnanimity simply
phrased means: "True to the principles of our nature and the benevolent
exercise of them toward others."\] The "principles of magnanimity" have
never been magnanimous at all, and the bourgeoisie has always used
reactionary forces to oppress the proletariat. The so-called "way of
loyalty and reciprocity" was merely a hoax which the exploiting class
used to paralyze the revolutionary spirit of the laboring people. The
present-day bona fide disciple of Confucius, Lin Piao, even picked up
such dust-covered weapons as "one who wields virtue prospers, one who
wields force perishes," vainly attempting to restrict the freedom of the
proletariat and to oppose the use of revolutionary violence against the
reactionary class. With respect to the consistent fallacy opposing
revolutionary violence championed by domestic and foreign revisionists,
Chairman Mao solemnly pointed out: "The central task and the highest
form of revolution is armed seizure of political power and the
resolution of issues by armed struggle. This
Marxist-Leninist revolutionary principle is universally
correct. Whether it is in China or abroad, it is always correct."
<a id="7">[[7]](#bot_7)</a> This is a universal
law of proletarian revolution.

### _The Crux of the "Productivity First Theory" Is Its Opposition to Proletarian Revolution and Proletarian Dictatorship_

The most fundamental betrayal of Marxism by the new and old revisionists
is their opposition to proletarian revolution and proletarian
dictatorship. The tattered banner hoisted in their opposition to
proletarian revolution and proletarian dictatorship is often the
reactionary "productivity first theory."

The revisionists Bernstein and Kautsky of the Second International tried
very hard to champion the idea that owing to the development of the
productive forces, capitalist countries with highly developed industries
would "gradually give rise to" the socialist economic system. It was not
necessary to resort to violent revolution. Capitalist countries with
underdeveloped industries, colonies, and satellite countries must first
"develop" their productive forces. Without highly developed productive
forces, the proletariat could not wage revolution. This was an early
version of the "productivity first theory" in the international
communist movement. This fallacy treated social transformation purely as
an issue of the development of the productive forces. It completely
ignored the effect of the production relations on the development of the
productive forces and the effect of the superstructure on the economic
basis. It ignored the fact that in a class society, social
transformation must go through violent class struggle before this theory
of historical materialism can be realized.

The founder of Marxism dealt a firm blow to the "productivity first
theory" of the revisionists. Engels pointed out: "According to
historical materialism, the determining factor in the historical process
must ultimately be production and reproduction of actual living
conditions. Neither Marx nor I has ascribed greater importance to any
other factor. If some people have deliberately distorted
this, saying that economic factors are the only determining factors,
then they have converted this issue into an empty, abstract, and
ridiculous verbal exercise."
<a id="8">[[8]](#bot_8)</a>

In the proletarian revolution of Russia, people like Trotsky and
Bukharin again picked up this worn "productivity first theory" in a vain
attempt to oppose the Russian proletariat's triumphant advance against
the capitalist system. They insisted that economically backward Russia
was not qualified to establish socialism. This type of nonsense was
soundly criticized by Lenin. Lenin asked: "Why can't we first use
revolutionary means to attain the preconditions for achieving this
certain level and catch up with the people of other countries on the
basis of worker-peasant political power and the Soviet system?"
<a id="9">[[9]](#bot_9)</a>

In the course of China's democratic and socialist revolutions,
successive leaders of the revisionist line, from Ch'en Tu-hsiu to Liu
Shao-ch'i and Lin Piao, all borrowed the reactionary "productivity first
theory" from the Second International revisionists and Trotskyites. They
said that China's economy was backward and that the proletariat could
seize political power only after capitalism was highly developed. This
in effect would eliminate China's revolution and keep China in her
semicolonial and semifeudal status. Chairman Mao has countered this
position with this observation: "Without political reform, all
productive forces are doomed to be destroyed. It is true for agriculture
and also true for industry."
<a id="10">[[10]](#bot_10)</a> Referring to the
semi-colonial and semifeudal status of China's old society, Chairman Mao
pointed out: China's revolution must proceed in two steps. The first
step is the new democratic revolution. The second step is the socialist
revolution. These are two different, and yet related, revolutionary
processes. The democratic revolution is the necessary preparation for
the socialist revolution. The socialist revolution is an inevitable
trend of the democratic revolution. This totally and thoroughly
demolishes the conspiracy of people like Ch'en Tu-hsiu who vainly
attempted to obstruct the revolutionary flood by resorting to the
reactionary "productivity first theory."

Chairman Mao said: "True enough, productive forces,
practice, and economic substructure generally appear to
play the determining role. Whoever denies this fact is not qualified to
be a materialist. But under certain conditions, production relations,
theory, and superstructure also revolve and show their important and
determining role. This must also be accepted."
<a id="11">[[11]](#bot_11)</a> The history of
the international communist movement has demonstrated that the line of
demarcation between Marxism and revisionism in the proletarian struggle
for political power lies in whether one persistently follows the
dialectical materialist theory of the unity of the production relations
and the productive forces and the unity of the superstructure and the
economic substructure or whether one pushes the reactionary
"productivity first theory."

[The Socialist Society Is a Fairly Long Historical Stage](#)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _The Socialist Society Is a Period of Struggle between Declining Capitalism and Emerging Communism_

What kind of a society is the socialist society that is established
through proletarian revolution? What are its basic characteristics?

Marx pointed out: "Between capitalist society and communist society,
there is a revolutionary period of transformation from the former to the
latter. Corresponding to this period is a political transition period.
The state in this period can only be one under proletarian revolutionary
dictatorship." <a id="12">[[12]](#bot_12)</a>
The period described by Marx as "aperiod of revolutionary transformation
from the former to the latter" and "a political transition period" is
the historical period of socialism. The society in this period is the
socialist society under proletarian dictatorship.

In the socialist society, the public ownership system of the means of
production replaces the private ownership system. The laboring people
control the fate of the socialist economy and become the masters of
society. Marxist ideological education gradually liberates millions of
laboring people from the influence of the old society to
progress along the socialist and communist paths. From this aspect,
socialist society already possesses some elements of communist society.
But socialist society is merely a preliminary stage of communist
society, not a completely communist society. Just as Marx pointed out:
"What we describe here is such a communist society. It is not fully
developed on its own basis. On the contrary, it has just emerged from
the capitalist society. Therefore, traces of the old society from which
it was born can still be seen in its economic, moral, and ideological
aspects." <a id="13">[[13]](#bot_13)</a> This
is to say, in various aspects of socialist society, there still remain
some capitalist traditions and influences: the bourgeoisie and all
exploiting classes have been overthrown, but their influence on
economics, politics, and ideology will exist for a long time. The
disparities between the worker and the peasant, the urban and the rural
areas, and mental labor and physical labor which are left over from the
old society and the remaining legal rights reflecting these disparities
will persist for a long time. Consequently, the whole historical stage
of socialist society "has to be a period of struggle between declining
capitalism and emerging communism."
<a id="14">[[14]](#bot_14)</a>

This nature and characteristic of socialist society determine that
socialist society will not be a short and temporary period, but a fairly
long historical stage.

Before the socialist revolution, the revolutions to replace slavery with
feudalism and feudalism with capitalism merely constituted the
substitution of a new exploitative system for an old exploitative
system. The proletarian socialist revolution is fundamentally different.
It will thoroughly eliminate all exploitative systems among men, all
classes and class disparities, and the remaining bourgeois legal rights
reflecting these disparities. This revolution is richer, wider, and more
complex than any other revolution in history. The goal of communism can
be realized in the end only through long-term struggle and by gradually
creating favorable conditions.

To eliminate classes, the socialist society must make a thoroughly clean
break from all customary influences of the traditional
concept of private ownership and the old society. The specter of
Confucius, who stubbornly defended slavery in China more than two
thousand years ago, has been used by the exploiting classes of various
historical periods to consolidate their reactionary rule. Today, the
reactionary thought of Confucius is still used by the bourgeoisie and
revisionists as an ideological weapon to restore capitalism. It is a
long and complex task to solve the issue of whether socialism or
capitalism will win out in the sphere of political ideology. Chairman
Mao pointed out: "In the sphere of political ideology, the struggle for
triumph between socialism and capitalism requires a long time to
resolve. It will not be completed in a few decades. It may take
centuries." <a id="15">[[15]](#bot_15)</a>

"The final triumph of building a socialist country not only depends on
the efforts of its own proletariat and the broad people, but also on the
triumph of world revolution, the global elimination of exploitative
systems among men, and the liberation of the human race."
<a id="16">[[16]](#bot_16)</a> We are still in
the period of imperialism and proletarian revolution. The final triumph
of the socialist revolution will be won only after a series of
difficult, complex, and long-term class struggles in the world.

Correctly understanding the nature and characteristics of socialist
society, correctly understanding that socialist society is a fairly long
historical stage, and drawing a line between scientific socialism and
all kinds of fake socialism has great significance for the success of
the proletariat of all countries in their socialist revolution and for
the struggle to prevent capitalist restoration after the victory of the
revolution. The victory of socialism over a large area of the world will
force its enemies to disguise themselves as socialists. They will hoist
various "socialist" banners to deceive the world and win fame for
themselves. In the contemporary period, there is the "developed
socialism" served up by Brezhnev, the "real socialism" peddled by Lin
Piao, and so forth. People like Brezhnev vainly hope to hide themselves
behind "developed socialism" in order to increase their exploitation and
oppression of the laboring people in their own country and
unscrupulously restore capitalism. Abroad, they step up
aggression and expansion in their futile attempt to achieve world
supremacy. The so-called "developed socialism" is a new form of
bureaucratic monopoly capitalism, that is, social imperialism. The "real
socialism" peddled by people like Lin Piao was merely a disguise. His
reactionary program was Confucius' "restraining oneself and restoring
the rites. "He clamored that "of all things, this is the most
important." His intention was to conspire to sabotage China's socialist
system under the proletarian dictatorship and to restore capitalism. The
so-called "real socialism" was in fact real capitalism. This company of
renegades vainly attempted to mix the genuine with the fictitious in
order to paralyze the revolutionary spirit of the broad masses of
people. But, Marxist scientific socialism cannot be faked. Once it is
compared with the nature and characteristics of the socialist society as
explained by Marxism, it is easy to expose the various brands of fake
socialism.

### _The Theory of the Basic Contradictions in the Socialist Society Is the Theoretical Basis for Continuing Revolution under Proletarian Dictatorship_

After proletarian dictatorship was established in China, Chairman Mao
laid down a general line for the Party in the transition period, "Within
a fairly long period of time, socialist industrialization is to be
gradually realized in the country, and socialist transformation of
agriculture, the handicraft industry, and capitalist industry and
commerce by the state is to be gradually realized."
<a id="17">[[17]](#bot_17)</a> According to
this general line, China had basically completed the socialist
transformation of the ownership system of the means of production in
1956. In this situation, is socialist society still a historical process
of the motion of contradictions? What are the basic contradictions in
socialist society? Are these contradictions mainly manifested in the
contradiction and the struggle between the proletariat and the
bourgeoisie? It is exactly in these questions that fundamental
differences exist between Marxism and modern revisionism.

The Soviet revisionist renegade clique flatly denies that
contradictions exist in socialist society from beginning to end. It
flatly denies that these contradictions are mainly manifest in the
struggle between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. It flatly denies
that it is exactly the unity and struggle between opposites that propels
the development of socialist society. Its intent is to conceal its evil
countenance of totally restoring capitalism and implementing fascist
dictatorship. The company of Liu Shao-ch'i and Lin Piao followed in the
footsteps of the Soviet revisionists. After the great victory achieved
in China's socialist transformation of the ownership system of the means
of production, they fabricated nonsense claiming that "there was a
contradiction between the advanced socialist system and the backward
social productive forces." They vainly attempted to use this nonexistent
"contradiction" to negate the ever-present contradiction between the
production relations and the productive forces, between the
superstructure and the economic substructure. To cover up their
conspiracy to restore capitalism in China, they denied that the main
contradiction in Chinese society was the contradiction between the
working class and the bourgeoisie. Faced with this revisionist
countercurrent, Chairman Mao has advanced the great theory about the
basic contradictions in socialist society based on the fundamental
principles of Marxism and the accumulated experience of the
international communist movement. Chairman Mao pointed out that the
universal law of unity and struggle between opposites in Nature, human
society, and human thought is equally applicable to the socialist
society. "In the socialist society, the basic contradictions are still
the contradictions between the production relations and the productive
forces, and between the superstructure and the economic basis."
<a id="18">[[18]](#bot_18)</a> Chairman Mao's
theory about the basic contradictions in socialist society succeeds,
defends, and develops Marxism-Leninism. It has dealt a fatal blow to
modern revisionism and has effectively armed the proletariat and the
broad laboring people.

The socialist production relations correspond to the development of the
productive forces. It permits the productive forces to
develop rapidly at a speed that is not possible in the old society. The
state system and law under proletarian dictatorship and superstructures
such as the socialist ideology which are guided by Marxism also conform
to the socialist economic basis, namely socialist production relations.
This is the fundamental aspect. But there is another aspect of the
contradictions in socialist society between the production relations and
the productive forces and between the superstructure and the economic
basis. The correspondence and contradiction with one another among the
various aspects of the basic contradictions of socialist society propels
socialist society forward.

In order to correctly understand how the production relations correspond
to and contradict the productive forces in socialist society, it is
necessary to make a concrete analysis of the production relations in
socialist society.

During a certain period of time in socialist society, there still exist
nonsocialist production relations. With regard to the ownership system,
for example, the joint state and private enterprises in China were
basically socialist in nature. But during a certain period of time, the
capitalist could still obtain a fixed interest. In other words,
exploitation and remnants of capitalist private ownership still existed.
After the fixed interest was abolished, there were still remnants of
individual economy in the urban and rural areas for a fairly long period
of time in the socialist society. In the aspect of interpersonal
relations, opposition between classes representing the capitalist
production relations and the laboring people still existed. With regard
to the distribution of personal consumption goods, high salaries were
still paid to the capitalist and bourgeois experts whose services were
retained for a period of time. These high salaries did not embody the
socialist principle of from each according to his ability and to each
according to his labor, but were in fact a form of redemption. All these
nonsocialist production relations were not only in conflict with the
development of the productive forces, but also with socialist production
relations. In the development process of socialist construction, these
nonsocialist production relations must gradually be transformed.

On the other hand, the socialist production relations
themselves also undergo a development process from an imperfect state to
a more perfect state. In socialist society, "communism is still not
completely mature economically. It still cannot completely free itself
from capitalist tradition and
influence."<a id="19">[[19]](#bot_19)</a> The
establishment of the socialist public ownership system was a fundamental
negation of the private ownership system. But this does not imply that
the issue of ownership is completely settled. The consolidation and
perfection of the socialist state ownership system and the socialist
collective ownership system by the laboring masses must undergo a long
process during which the proletariat and the bourgeoisie fight for
economic leadership. The socialist collective ownership system must also
undergo a process of transition from a small collective ownership system
to a large collective ownership system and finally to a socialist state
ownership system. With regard to interpersonal relations in socialist
production, there still exist disparities between the worker and the
peasant, the urban and rural areas, and mental and physical labor and
also bourgeois legal rights left over from the old society which reflect
these disparities. Distribution of consumer goods according to labor is
still a bourgeois legal right. These bourgeois legal rights will exist
for a long time in the socialist stage. The proletariat must accept them
and at the same time create favorable conditions for their retirement
from the historical stage.

At the same time, with the rapid development of the productive forces,
conditions in which some aspects of socialist production relations are
no longer compatible with the development of the productive forces must
be adjusted and streamlined in time.

But, in the final analysis, the central problem of perfecting socialist
production relations cannot but be a process of struggle in which the
emerging communist factors gradually triumph over the declining
capitalist tradition and influence.

To understand how the superstructure of the socialist society
corresponds to and contradicts the economic substructure, it is
also necessary to conduct a concrete analysis of the
superstructure in socialist society. In socialist society, there exists
a bourgeois ideology. In the superstructure of socialist society, for
example, the existence of certain representatives of the bourgeoisie in
the state organization, certain bureaucratic styles of work, and certain
imperfections in the state system are all in conflict with the socialist
economic substructure. Only by continually resolving these
contradictions can the superstructure further meet the need to
consolidate and develop the socialist economic foundation.

The basic contradictions in socialist society are fundamentally
different in nature and condition from the contradictions between the
production relations and the productive forces, between the
superstructure and the economic substructure in the old society. The
basic contradictions of the capitalist society are manifested as violent
oppositions and thrusts. These contradictions can only be resolved
through violent revolution by the proletariat, the overthrow of the
bourgeois dictatorship, and the elimination of capitalist production
relations. The contradictions between socialist production relations and
the productive forces, between the superstructure and the economic
substructure are an entirely different matter. The process of continual
emergence and resolution of these contradictions are also the process of
transition from the socialist society to the communist society. In this
process, workers, peasants, and other laboring people, who are the
ruling class, are not overthrown by any opposition power. They still
remain the masters of society. The public ownership system is not
destroyed, but is developed to a higher stage. In this sense, the
contradictions of socialist society "are not antagonistic
contradictions, and can be resolved continually through the socialist
system itself." <a id="20">[[20]](#bot_20)</a>

The conformity and contradiction between socialist production relations
and the productive forces, between the superstructure and the economic
substructure constitute a continuous dialectical process which propels
socialist society continuously forward.

Chairman Mao's theory on the basic contradictions in the
socialist society is the theoretical basis for the
continuous revolution under proletarian dictatorship. Chairman Mao
pointed out: "In China, although socialist transformation in ownership
is basically completed," "remnants of the overthrown landlord and
comprador classes still exist. The bourgeoisie still exists, and the
petty bourgeoisie is just in the process of transformation." "The issue
of whether socialism or capitalism will win out has not really been
resolved." "Class struggle between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie,
class struggle between political forces, and class struggle in ideology
between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie are still prolonged,
tortuous, and sometimes even
violent."<a id="21">[[21]](#bot_21)</a> This,
then, is the first clear-cut conclusion drawn from the theory and
practice of the international communist movement: After the socialist
transformation of the ownership system of the means of production is
basically completed, there still exist classes and class struggle. The
proletariat must continue revolution and pursue the socialist revolution
on the political, economic, ideological, and cultural battlefronts to
the very end.

### _Firmly Adhere to the Basic Line of the Party for the Whole Socialist Historical Stage_

Chairman Mao teaches us that "everything depends on whether or not the
ideological and political line is correct." To insist on continuous
revolution under proletarian dictatorship, the proletariat needs a
correct line.

Based on a detailed analysis of the basic contradictions in socialist
society and his theory of continuous revolution under proletarian
dictatorship, Chairman Mao formulated for our Party a basic line for the
whole socialist historical stage: "The socialist society is a fairly
long historical period. In the socialist historical stage, there still
exist classes, class contradictions, class struggle, the struggle
between the socialist and the capitalist roads, and the danger of
capitalist restoration. We must be fully aware of the protracted and
complex nature of these struggles. We must be on the alert. We must
conduct socialist education. We must correctly understand
and handle class contradictions and class struggle, correctly
distinguish contradictions with our enemies from contradictions among
the people and handle them accordingly. Otherwise, our socialist country
will go the wrong way and deteriorate, and restoration will appear. From
now on, we must talk about it every year, every month, and every day so
that we can have a clearer appreciation of this issue and a
Marxist-Leninist line."
<a id="22">[[22]](#bot_22)</a> This proletarian
revolutionary line formulated by Chairman Mao reveals the objective law
governing class struggle in the socialist period and is the only correct
line for realizing the basic program of the Party. This basic line is a
brilliant beacon that shines over the historical route of continuous
revolution for the whole Party, the whole country, and the whole people
under proletarian dictatorship,,

The protracted nature of class struggle in the socialist society is due
to the inevitable reflection of the struggle between emerging communist
factors and declining capitalist tradition and influence on the class
relations. The overthrown exploiting class still survives and continues
to contest the proletariat in their every possible attempt to recover
their lost "heaven." Spontaneous forces among the petty bourgeoisie can
also lead to a new bourgeoisie. Because of the influence of the
bourgeoisie and the encirclement and corrosive influence of the petty
bourgeoisie, some degenerate elements, persons in power taking the
capitalist road, and spokesmen for the bourgeoisie may emerge in the
working class, Party and government organizations, and in cultural and
educational departments. At the same time, imperialism and social
imperialism always try hard to convert socialist countries into
capitalist countries or even colonial or semicolonial countries.
International class struggle will inevitably be reflected in the
socialist countries. In the process of continually perfecting the
socialist production relations and superstructure, communist factors in
production relations and the superstructure will be gradually
strengthened and capitalist tradition and influence will gradually be
swept away. This will certainly promote the continual consolidation
of the socialist economic substructure and the continuous
development of the productive forces.

The proletariat and the broad laboring people under its leadership are
the representatives of socialist production relations. They firmly
adhere to the socialist road and always firmly adhere to the Marxist
theory of continuous revolution and the stage theory of revolutionary
development. They promote the continuous consolidation and perfection of
socialist production relations and the superstructure. The bourgeoisie
and its agents inside the Communist Party are the representative of
capitalist production relations. They insist on taking the capitalist
road and always try hard to transform socialist production relations
into capitalist production relations. Therefore, in the whole socialist
historical stage, the struggle between the proletariat and the
bourgeoisie and the struggle between the socialist and the capitalist
roads always exist objectively and cannot be changed by human will. This
is to say, the struggles are inevitable. Though people may want to avoid
them, it is not possible. The proletariat can only gain victory by
taking advantage of favorable conditions.

Class struggle in the socialist society develops in wavelike motions
with peaks and troughs. This is due to a difference in the conditions of
class struggle and not to whether there is class struggle or not. The
history of the socialist society tells us that class enemies and all
monsters and freaks will show themselves. Chairman Mao pointed out:
"Total disorder is followed by total order. This cycle repeats itself
once every seven or eight years. Monsters and freaks will show
themselves of their own accord. Their class nature determines that they
must show themselves."
<a id="23">[[23]](#bot_23)</a> The law of class
struggle requires that there be a big struggle every few years. Only
after repeated contests and with the gradual wane of the reactionary
class can the proletariat finally complete the great historical task of
eliminating the bourgeoisie and all exploiting classes.

Class struggle in society must of necessity be reflected in the Party
and is manifested as a struggle between the two lines
inside the Party. The substance of the basic Party line is
"to apply Marxism and not apply revisionism." The basic Party line tells
us that the struggle against revisionism is a longterm struggle. In the
last twenty and more years, the struggle between our Party and the four
anti-Party cliques headed by Kao Kang, Jao Shu-shih, P'eng Te-huai, Liu
Shao-ch'i, and Lin Piao was a struggle against revisionism. Chairman Mao
personally launched and led the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution.
It was a great revolution in the superstructure, a great political
revolution under the condition of proletarian dictatorship. It could
also be called the second revolution of China. In the Great Proletarian
Cultural Revolution, Chairman Mao led the whole Party, the entire armed
forces, and the whole people to destroy the two bourgeois command
headquarters headed by Liu Shao-ch'i and Lin Piao. This bunch of
renegades and traitors conspired to usurp the supreme power of the Party
and the state and sought to fundamentally transform the basic Party line
and policy for the whole socialist historical stage in order to
transform the Marxist-Leninist Party into a revisionist fascist party,
sabotage proletarian dictatorship, and restore capitalism. The substance
of their revisionist line is extreme Right. Their counterrevolutionary
conspiracy has been crushed by the hundreds of millions of revolutionary
people of China. The Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution has won a
great victory. Revolution is still developing, and struggle is still
continuing. In the historical stage of socialist society, the struggle
between the two lines inside the Party which reflects class struggle
will long exist. Chairman Mao pointed out: "The present Great Cultural
Revolution is merely the first one. There will be many more afterward."
"Who will win out in revolution can be determined only after a fairly
long period of time in history. If it is not handled well, capitalist
restoration is possible at any time. All the Party members and the whole
people should not think that things will be all right after one or two,
or three or four, great cultural revolutions. Make doubly sure that
vigilance will not be relaxed."
<a id="24">[[24]](#bot_24)</a>

[Socialist Society Constitutes the Beginning of People Consciously Creating History](#)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _The Great Soaring Leap in the History of Human Development_

The proletariat and the laboring people continue revolution under the
proletarian dictatorship in order to make the superstructure serve the
socialist economic substructure, to make production relations conform to
the development of the productive forces, and to consciously transform
society and Nature according to the economic law of socialism. This is a
giant stride in human history.

There are several thousand years of written human history. But, before
the birth of socialist society, this long period of history was merely a
"prehistorical period" in human society. The producer was enslaved not
only by Nature but also by the means of production which he
manufactured. "It was not the producer who controlled the means of
production, but the means of production which controlled the producer."
<a id="25">[[25]](#bot_25)</a> That is to say,
the exploiting class, which controlled the basic means of production and
thus state political power, maliciously oppressed and exploited the
broad laboring people and reduced them to dark and miserable lives. The
proletarian socialist revolution is a spring thunder that has shaken
human history. It has brought an end to the "prehistorical period" and
has'ushered in a new era in history in which people consciously create
history.

This material basis for the great leap in human history lies in the
transformation of private ownership of the means of production into
socialist public ownership after the proletariat and the laboring people
have seized political power. In socialist society, public ownership of
the means of production makes the laboring people, who are the majority
of the people, the masters of the state and enterprises. Only when the
laboring people have become the masters of social relations can they
become the masters of nature and consciously transform the
world and create history under the guidance of Marxism.

Naturally, compared with an advanced communist society, the socialist
society is only the beginning of an era in which people consciously
create history. In addition to the limits imposed on the developmental
level of the productive forces and on our knowledge of the physical
world, the main obstacle lies in the continuing existence in socialist
society of the bourgeoisie and its ideological influence and of
disparities between the worker and the peasant, the urban and rural
areas, and mental and physical labor. Therefore, although the
proletariat and the broad laboring people control state political power
and the basic means of production, their conscious activities in
transforming the world and creating history are still restricted by
history. Nevertheless, "the most important thing is that solid ice is
crushed, the route is cleared, and the road clear."
<a id="26">[[26]](#bot_26)</a> The proletariat
will finally shape a communist new world through the socialist society
and in its own image.

### _Fully Exploit the Initiating Role of the Superstructure, Consciously Make Use of the Objective Law_

In socialist society, people begin to consciously create their own
history. This does not mean that people can create history at will. It
simply means that for the first time people of the entire society can
consciously identify and make use of the objective law to serve the
interests of the proletariat and the broad laboring people.

"Freedom consists of knowledge of the inevitable and transformation of
the objective world."
<a id="27">[[27]](#bot_27)</a>
Economic laws are objective laws governing the development of social
economy and are not subject to change according to human will. People
cannot "transform" or "create" objective laws. But, people are not
entirely helpless before objective laws. In socialist society, people
can correctly identify them, rely on them, make use of them, and lead
the destructive forces of certain laws into another direction or
restrict their scope of operation. On the other hand, a larger scope of
operation is given to laws that are constructive in order to achieve the
purpose of transforming the objective world.

Under different social systems, the forms to which economic laws apply
possess different characteristics. In capitalist society, because the
means of production are privately owned, production is carried on under
blind competition and chaotic conditions. Therefore, economic laws
always play an alien role in the capitalist society. The socialist
society is based on public ownership of the means of production. The
laboring people are the masters of social economic relations. This makes
it possible for people to consciously practice economic laws. Just as
Engels once prophesied, "Up to now, the laws governing the people's
social behavior, like the natural laws which are alien to the people but
nevertheless control them and oppose them, will be skillfully mastered
by the people and subject to their control by that time."
<a id="28">[[28]](#bot_28)</a>

The establishment of a system of public ownership of the means of
production makes it possible for people to identify and consciously
operate according to the economic laws. But, to turn this possibility
into reality, struggle is inevitable. The efforts of the proletariat to
operate according to economic laws and of society to accelerate the
transformation of the socialist society into a communist society will
certainly meet violent resistance from the bourgeoisie and other
decadent social forces, especially interference and sabotage from the
revisionist line. The process of conscious application of socialist
economic laws is the process of struggle between the proletariat and the
bourgeoisie, between the Marxist line and the revisionist line. At the
same time, people must also resolve "the contradiction between the
objective law of economic development in socialist society and our
subjective knowledge" in practice.
<a id="29">[[29]](#bot_29)</a>
This represents another process. It is necessary to start from practice,
conduct investigations and research, go from no experience to experience
and from a little experience to a lot of experience, and gradually
overcome impulses and raise consciousness. This process of understanding
cannot be divorced from the transformation process of people's world
outlooks. People with the proletarian world outlook can more correctly
identify the laws of development governing socialist economy. Firm
adherents to the bourgeois outlook can never correctly identify the laws
of development governing socialist economy. Therefore, this process of
understanding is also a process of destroying the bourgeois world
outlook and establishing the proletarian world outlook. Those viewpoints
which regard the conscious application of economic laws in socialist
society as an easy matter that requires neither hard work, nor the
overcoming of resistance from the bourgeoisie and from interference from
the revisionist line, nor struggle between the two world outlooks are
wrong. These are viewpoints which advocate: Let nature takes its own
course, or let us extinguish class struggle.

In the socialist society, to consciously apply objective economic laws,
it is necessary to fully exploit the active aspect of the
superstructure.

The immense capability of the socialist superstructure is manifested
mainly in the leadership of the proletarian political party. The
proletarian political party is established according to Marxist
revolutionary theory and revolutionary style. It is good at
comprehending objective laws governing historical development,
assimilating the wisdom of the masses, grasping the general trend of
historical development, and formulating correct theory, programs, lines,
and general and specific policies based on actual conditions in the
various stages of social development. These correct theories, programs,
lines, and general and specific policies come from the masses and return
to the masses, leading them to victory in their struggle. The Communist
Party of China uses Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tsetung Thought as a
theoretical basis for its guiding thought. That the Party's theory of
revolution, especially its theory about continuous revolution under
proletarian dictatorship, and the Marxist line and general and specific
policies formulated by the proletarian political party can be so
invincible is because the theories correctly reflect the objective laws
governing the economic development of society. "Without revolutionary
theory, there will never be revolutionary action."
<a id="30">[[30]](#bot_30)</a> It
is therefore important to seriously study the Marxist theory concerning
continuous revolution under proletarian dictatorship in order to guide
us to correctly identify, and operate according to, the economic laws
governing socialist society.

Party leadership is ultimately leadership by the Marxist line. Only by
grasping revolution in the superstructure, including the ideological
sphere, and making sure that the ideological and political lines are
correct, can a Marxist party lead the proletarian revolutionary
enterprise from victory to still greater victory.

The state political power of proletarian dictatorship under the
leadership of the Communist Party plays an immense role in guaranteeing
the thorough implementation of the basic Party line and in organizing
and leading the socialist economy. By exercising its own state political
power, the proletariat can unfold socialist revolution on the economic
battlefront, establish and develop socialist production relations, plan,
organize, and lead the whole national economy, develop social productive
forces, and unfold socialist revolution on the political, ideological,
and cultural battlefronts in order to consolidate the socialist economic
basis by continually perfecting the socialist superstructure. Continuous
revolution under proletarian dictatorship requires full exploitation of
this initiating role of the state political power of proletarian
dictatorship. These conditions cannot be created under bourgeois
dictatorship. Bourgeois revolution comes to an end as soon as the
bourgeoisie seizes political power. Although the bourgeoisie tried hard
to use political power and other parts of the superstructure to protect
capitalist production relations, the steady deterioration of capitalist
production relations led to a corresponding reaction in bourgeois
political power. This kind of protection was merely a moribund struggle.
As far as the socialist revolution is concerned, the seizure of
political power by the proletariat is merely the beginning of
revolution. Socialist production relations undergo a regenerating
process with the development of the productive forces. The state
political power under proletarian dictatorship, promoting such a
regeneration and propelling the development of the
productive forces, is, in the end, the most powerful weapon by which the
proletariat continues socialist revolution. With this weapon, the
proletariat can now crush the resistance of the bourgeoisie and other
reactionary forces, unite the whole laboring people around itself,
triumphantly unfold the Three Great Revolutionary Movements of class
struggle, production struggle, and scientific experiment, promote the
rapid development of social productive forces, and promote the steady
consolidation and perfection of the socialist economic basis and
superstructure in order to make socialist society advance along the
basic Party line until the realization of the highest ideal of
communism.

### _Major Study References_

Marx, _Critique of the Gotha Program_.

Lenin, "Economics and Politics in the Period of Proletarian
Dictatorship."

Chairman Mao, "On the Correct Handling of Contradictions among the
People."

### _Review Problems_

1\. Why do we say violent revolution is the universal law of proletarian
revolution? What is the crux of the "productivity first theory"?

2\. How do we understand socialist society? How do we interpret Chairman
Mao's theory about the basic contradiction of socialist society as being
the theoretical basis for continuous revolution under proletarian
dictatorship?

3\. Why do we say that the focal point of the struggle between the
proletariat and the revisionist leaders in the whole socialist
historical stage lies in whether the basic Party line is firmly adhered
to or whether it is changed? How can the activating role of the
superstructure be fully exploited and the objective economic laws be
consciously applied?

_Notes_
--------------------------------

<a id="s_a">[\*](#bot_s_a)</a> She-hui-chu-i she-hui k'ai-ch'uang le jen-lei
li-shih ti hsin chi-yuan --- she-hui-chu-i she-hui ho wu-ch'an-chieh-chi
chuan-cheng.

<a id="bot_1">[[1]](#1)</a> Chairman Mao, "A Talk on the Fortieth
Anniversay Conference to Celebrate the Great October Revolution by the
Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union," Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1957, p. 5.

<a id="bot_2">[[2]](#2)</a> Marx, "Introduction to _A Critique of
Political Economy_," _Selected Works of Marx and
Engels_, Vol. 2, Jen-min ch'u-panshe, 1972, pp. 82-83.

<a id="bot_3">[[3]](#3)</a> Engels, _Anti-Diihring_,
_Selected Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 3, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 320.

<a id="bot_4">[[4]](#4)</a> "War and Strategic Problems," _Selected Works
of Mao Tse-tung_, Vol. 2, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p
512.

<a id="bot_5">[[5]](#5)</a> Marx, "French Civil War," _Selected Works of
Marx and Engels_, Vol. 2, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p.
372.

<a id="bot_6">[[6]](#6)</a> "A Talk to the Conference of Chin-Sui
Cadres," _Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung_, Vol. 4, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 1211.

<a id="bot_7">[[7]](#7)</a> "Problems of War and Strategy," p. 506.

<a id="bot_8">[[8]](#8)</a> Engels, "To Yueh-po-lo-heh (September 21-22,
1890)," _Selected Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 4, Jen-min
ch'u-panshe, 1972, p. 477.

<a id="bot_9">[[9]](#9)</a> "On Revolution of Our Country," _Complete
Works of Lenin_, Vol. 33, pp. 433-434.

<a id="bot_10">[[10]](#10)</a> "On Coalition Government," _Selected Works
of Mao Tsetung_, Vol. 3, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, p. 981.

<a id="bot_11">[[11]](#11)</a> "On Contradiction," _Selected Works of Mao
Tse-tung_, Vol. 1, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 300.

<a id="bot_12">[[12]](#12)</a> Marx, _Critique of the Gotha
Program_, _Selected Works of Marx and Engels_,
Vol. 3, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 21.

<a id="bot_13">[[13]](#13)</a> Ibid., p. 10.

<a id="bot_14">[[14]](#14)</a> "Economics and Politics in the Period of
Proletarian Dictatorship," _Selected Works of Lenin_, Vol.
4, Jen-min ch'upan-she, 1972, p. 84.

<a id="bot_15">[[15]](#15)</a> Quoted from "Khrushchev's Fake Communism
and Its Lesson for World History," Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1964, p. 52.

<a id="bot_16">[[16]](#16)</a> Quoted from _Hung-ch'i_ _\[Red
Flag\]_, 1969, No. 5.

<a id="bot_17">[[17]](#17)</a> Quoted from _Hung-ch'i_, 1971,
Nos. 7-8.

<a id="bot_18">[[18]](#18)</a> "On the Correct Handling of
Contradictions among the People," _Selected Readings from the Works of
Mao Tse-tung_, Part 1, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1965, p. 336.

<a id="bot_19">[[19]](#19)</a> _State and Revolution_,
_Selected Works of Lenin_, Vol. 3 Jen-min ch'u-pan-she,
1972, p. 256.

<a id="bot_20">[[20]](#20)</a> "On the Correct Handling of Contradictions
among the People," p. 336.

<a id="bot_21">[[21]](#21)</a> Ibid., p. 352.

<a id="bot_22">[[22]](#)</a> Quoted from _Hung-ch'i_, 1967,
No. 10.

<a id="bot_23">[[23]](#23)</a> Quoted from Wang Hung-wen, "Report on the
Revision of the Party Constitution," _Collected Documents from the Tenth
National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party_, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1973, p. 43.

<a id="bot_24">[[24]](#24)</a> Quoted from _Hung-ch'i_, 1967,
No. 7.

<a id="bot_25">[[25]](#25)</a> Engels, _Anti-Duhring_, p.
330.

<a id="bot_26">[[26]](#26)</a> "The Fourth Anniversary of the October
Revolution," _Selected Works of Lenin_, Vol. 4, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 570.

<a id="bot_27">[[27]](#27)</a> Quotations from Chairman Mao. Quoted from
_Jen-min jih-pao_ _\[People's Daily\]_, April 11, 1966.

<a id="bot_28">[[28]](#28)</a> Engels, Anti-Duhring, p. 323.

<a id="bot_29">[[29]](#29)</a> "On the Correct Handling of Contradictions
among the People," p. 363.

<a id="bot_30">[[30]](#30)</a> "What to Do?" _Selected Works of
Lenin_, Vol. 1, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 241.
