[*13* The Socialist System of Public Ownership Is the Basis of Socialist Production Relations](#)
====================================================================================================================================

[The System of Socialist State Ownership and Collective Ownership by the
Laboring
Masses](#)<a id="s_a">[\*](#bot_s_a)</a>

After the proletariat seizes political power, it is necessary to
systematically transform the system of private ownership of the means of
production into a socialist system of public ownership in order to
eliminate the causes of capitalism and all other exploitative systems
and to establish a socialist economic basis. This is an important step
in consolidating proletarian dictatorship and defeating capitalism with
socialism.

[The Socialist System of State Ownership Is the Main Economic Basis of Proletarian Dictatorship](#)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Proletariat and the Laboring People Must Control the Means of Production

In the past several thousand years, the fundamental reason for the
exploitation and oppression of the laboring people by the slave owner,
the feudal landlord, and the capitalist was that the means
of production were not in the hands of the laboring people. "In order to
force people to engage in any form of slave labor, it is necessary to
assume that the oppressor controls the means of production. Only by
relying on these means of production can the enslaved be manipulated."
<a id="1">[[1]](#bot_1)</a> Successive
generations of laboring people launched various forms of struggle in an
attempt to take the means of production into their own hands, but for
historical reasons, all their attempts failed. In capitalist society,
the proletariat nurtured and tempered by capitalist big industries began
to emerge. This class lost all control over the means of production.
Aside from the chains on his neck, the worker had absolutely nothing
else. With the increasing intensification of the contradictions between
the private character of capitalist ownership of the means of production
and the social character of production, the possibility of the
proletariat controlling the means of production developed.

However, the exploiting class is never willing to give up exploitation.
They not only abused the state machinery to protect their private
ownership of the means of production, but also concocted all sorts of
fallacies in the ideological sphere. For example, they said that the
poverty of the worker was due to the rapid increase in population, the
lack of a "just and reasonable principle of distribution," and so forth,
vainly attempting to deceive and dupe the laboring people so they would
not touch the bourgeois ownership of the means of production or control
the means of production. The revolutionary teachers of the proletariat
denounced this sort of fallacy. They pointed out that the root cause of
the exploitation and enslavement of the laboring people was that the
means of production were not in the hands of the laboring people but
were instead in the hands of the exploiting class. The first sentence in
the "Gotha Program" written during the workers' movement of Germany in
the 1870s under the influence of Lassalle was: "Labor is the source of
all wealth and culture." On the surface, "labor" was accorded a very
high position, but Marx at once saw the theoretical error of this
statement. He pointed out that labor could create wealth and culture
only by combining with the means of production. Without the
means of production and without ownership of the means of production,
what would happen to labor? Marx sharply pointed out: "A person who has
no other property besides his labor power will always be enslaved by
other people who possess the means of production, regardless of the
society or culture. He can labor and exist only at the mercy of other
people." <a id="2">[[2]](#bot_2)</a> The theory
of Marxism concerning the necessity for the proletariat to replace the
system of private ownership under capitalism by the system of public
ownership under socialism before it can free itself has theoretically
and politically smashed the exploiting class's insane capitalist
conspiracy to monopolize forever the means of production and to exploit
and enslave the laboring people. It has pointed out the correct
direction of struggle for the proletariat.

The development of the capitalist society makes it possible for the
proletariat and the laboring people to collectively possess the means of
production. To fully realize this possibility takes a fairly long
historical process. The proletariat must first crush the bourgeois state
machinery and establish a proletarian dictatorship before it can
"eliminate the cause of poverty and sow seeds of wealth," transform the
system of private ownership of the means of production into a system of
public ownership, and take the means of production into its own hands.
Only starting at this point will all exploitative systems be
fundamentally negated and will the proletariat and the laboring people
be liberated economically and be on the socialist road to common
affluence. On this road, there will still be plenty of struggles. Only
by persistently and firmly holding the fate of the socialist economy in
its own hands can the proletariat create favorable material conditions
for the elimination of all classes and class disparities and the
realization of the great ideal of communism. Once the means of
production are lost and the fate of the socialist economy is passed into
the hands of the bourgeoisie and its agents in the Party, the socialist
economy will deteriorate and the proletariat and the laboring people
will once again become "shivering and hungry slaves." This possibility
exists throughout the whole historical stage of socialist society.

### Confiscation and Redemption Are Ways to Establish the System of Socialist State Ownership

Marx and Engels pointed out as early as over a hundred years ago that
after the proletariat seizes political power, "it will make use of its
political power to gradually seize all the bourgeoisie's capital and put
all the means of production into the hands of the state, namely, the
proletariat, the ruling class."
<a id="3">[[3]](#bot_3)</a>

Because of the highly developed social nature of the productive forces
under capitalism, it requires a social center which will centrally
operate the departments and enterprises in order to overcome the
contradictions that may arise between the socialization of production
and the \[[inherited\]] capitalist private ownership. This social center
is the socialist state under proletarian dictatorship. Only by first
establishing a socialist system in which the state owns the means of
production and the proletariat and the laboring people hold firmly to
the economic life-line through their own state apparatus can the
capitalist exploitative system be completely eliminated.

Then, what are the means by which the proletariat can transform the
bourgeois ownership of the means of production into a socialist system
of state ownership? According to the experience of the international
communist movement and the Chinese experience, after the proletariat
seizes political power, big enterprises are immediately socialized,
while medium and small enterprises are gradually transformed,

In general, after the proletariat seizes political power, all
enterprises, big or small, coexist. Big capital represents the most
reactionary \[[form of\]] production relations, controlling the lifeblood
of the national economy and seriously impeding the development of social
productive forces. It is also the main economic substructure of
bourgeois reactionary rule. Immediately after the seizure of political
power, if the proletariat fails to control the national economy and lets
the big capitalists take it over, the proletariat can never consolidate
its power. In summing up the experience of the Paris Commune, Lenin
pointed out that one of the two mistakes that buried the
brilliant achievements obtained by the Paris Commune was that big
enterprises like the bank, which affected the life pulses of the
national economy, had not been seized by the proletariat. Therefore, big
capital must be immediately confiscated by the socialist state. Big
capital in China was the bureaucratic capital. This was the comprador
and feudal state monopoly capital possessed by the bureaucratic
bourgeoisie headed by Chiang Kai-shek. Chairman Mao made a penetrating
analysis of the reactionary nature of this capital and pointed out: "The
four big family clans of Chiang, Sung, K'ung, and Ch'en amassed immense
wealth amounting to ten to twenty billion dollars in the twenty years of
their rule and monopolized the lifeblood of China's economy. Monopoly
capital, combined with state political power, became state monopoly
capitalism. This monopoly capitalism was closely associated with foreign
capitalism, the domestic landlord class, and old rich peasants to become
a comprador and feudal state monopoly capitalism."
<a id="4">[[4]](#bot_4)</a> In the light of the
reactionary nature of bureaucratic capital, our Party clearly stipulated
early in the process of the democratic revolution the policy of
confiscating bureaucratic capital and "nationalizing it by the People's
Republic led by the proletariat."
<a id="5">[[5]](#bot_5)</a> This confiscation
of bureaucratic capital was gradually realized with the victorious
development of the liberation war. The confiscation of bureaucratic
capital, which accounted for 80 percent of the fixed capital assets in
China's manufacturing and transportation industries before the
liberation, eliminated the major portion of China's capitalist economy
and put the proletarian political power in control of the lifeblood of
the national economy. The economic basis of socialism was thus
established, creating favorable conditions for the development of the
socialist revolution and socialist construction.

After the proletariat seizes political power, confiscates big capital,
and establishes a socialist economic basis, it is possible to gradually
subject medium and small capital to socialist transformation through
redemption and transform the capitalist system of ownership of the means
of production into a socialist system of state ownership.
The class natures of medium and small capital are the same as that of
big capital. They are all embodied in the relation of the laboring
people being exploited by the capitalist; they have interests contrary
to those of the laboring masses and are the objects of socialist
revolution. However, there is still some difference among them, because
medium and small capital often possess the strong desire to develop
capitalism but at the same time can also be coerced into redemption by
the proletariat under certain conditions. Marxism believes that "under
certain conditions, the worker will never refuse to redeem from the
bourgeoisie." <a id="6">[[6]](#bot_6)</a> Once
the proletariat has seized political power and has controlled the
lifeblood of the national economy, it will be advantageous to the
proletariat if these capitalists can be coerced to accept a redemption
policy of the proletariat and transform their capitalist enterprises
into socialist enterprises.

In China, the national bourgeoisie possessing medium and small capital
assumed a dual character. In the period of democratic revolution, it
assumed a revolutionary character as well as a compromising character.
In the period of socialist revolution, it can be coerced into accepting
socialist transformation, but it also has the strong reactionary desire
to develop capitalism. The industrial and commercial enterprises
operated by this class played a dual role in the reconstruction period
of China's national economy. They played a constructive role in
increasing production needed by the national economy and the people's
livelihood, enlarging economic exchanges between the urban and rural
areas, and maintaining employment. But they also exploited the worker
and did anything for profit, thus playing a negative role in socialist
reconstruction and the people's livelihood. In the light of the dual
character of the national bourgeosie and the dual role of the national
capitalist economy, our Party formulated a policy to utilize, restrict,
and transform national capitalist manufacturing and commercial
enterprises, namely, utilizing their constructive role in the national
economy and the people's livelihood, restricting their negative role,
and gradually transforming them into a part of the socialist state
economy.

The socialist transformation of capitalist manufacturing
and commercial enterprises in China was conducted through various forms
of state capitalism. This state capitalism was "one that could be
restricted and whose scope of operation could be regulated"
<a id="7">[[7]](#bot_7)</a> by the
state under proletarian dictatorship. The primary form of China's state
capitalism consisted of processing, ordering, unified procurements, and
contract marketing in manufacturing and of purchasing and distribution
by commission in commerce. In this form, the capitalist economy could be
restricted to a certain extent in its direction of production and
operation and in the degree of exploitation. Even so, this form did not
change the nature of possession and control over the means of production
by the capitalist and could not fundamentally resolve the antagonistic
contradiction of the capitalist production relations obstructing the
development of the productive forces. With the development of China's
social productive forces, the objective requirement was to turn primary
state capitalism into advanced state capitalism, namely, joint
state-private operation. In joint state-private enterprises, the state
sent cadres to do leadership work. They managed the enterprise by
relying on the working masses and in accordance with state plans. This
in effect forced the capitalist to give up his control of the means of
production in the enterprises. The exploitation of labor by capital was
severely restricted. This advanced form of state capitalism was divided
into two stages in China's practice, namely, joint state-private
operation in individual enterprises and then in whole industries. In the
stage of joint operation in individual enterprises, the capitalist
participated in profit distribution according to his share in the total
capital of the enterprise. The profit obtained by the capitalist
increased with the development of production. This was unfavorable to
the full mobilization of labor enthusiasm among workers and to the
accumulation of state capital. After the entire industry was put under
joint state-private operation, the capitalist was allowed to receive
only a fixed dividend, that is, fixed interest (about 5 percent per
annum) for a specific period of time, according to his share of the
fixed capital valued prior to the state-private joint operation. Thus,
the capitalist's right of ownership of the means of production was
expressed exclusively by a fixed dividend according to the size of his
shares. Such joint state-private enterprises were basically socialist
enterprises. At the end of the period in which fixed interest was
payable to the capitalist as stipulated by the state and no more fixed
interest was paid out, state-private enterprises became enterprises
under the full-fledged socialist state ownership system.

Under proletarian dictatorship, there is no difference between the
transformation of medium and small capital and that of big capital. But
this does not imply the absence of class struggle. In fact, acute class
struggle between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie runs through the
whole process of the socialist transformation of capitalist industry and
commerce. This struggle is manifested as a struggle between restriction
and counterrestriction, transformation and countertransformation. In the
spring of 1950, in order to stabilize prices, there was a struggle
against speculative activities. In 1951, there was the "Five Anti"
struggle against bribery, tax theft and evasion, theft of state
property, shoddy workmanship and inferior materials, and theft of state
economic secrets. In 1957, there was a struggle against the frantic
attacks from the rightists. These were acute class struggles. These
class struggles were also reflected in the Party itself as struggles
between the two lines. The revisionist clique of Liu Shao-ch'i
repeatedly peddled the nonsense that capitalist "exploitation is
meritorious" and opposed the socialist transformation of capitalist
industry and commerce in an attempt to preserve capitalist influence.
The revisionist clique of Kao Kang and Jao Shu-shih, on the other hand,
conspired to seize supreme Party and state power to meet the needs of
the bourgeois opposition to socialist transformation. Under the
leadership of the Party Central Committee headed by Chairman Mao, the
conspiracies of these renegades were crushed in time, their revisionist
lines were criticized, and a victory in the socialist transformation of
capitalist industry and commerce was finally won. This fact demonstrated
that only by firmly adhering to the struggle of the
proletariat against the bourgeoisie, the Marxist line against the
revisionist line, and effectively discouraging a handful of reactionary
capitalists and their agents in the Party who opposed the socialist
revolution and who were hostile to and sabotaged the socialist
construction could the national bourgeoisie be forced to gradually
accept socialist transformation.

### The Socialist System of State Ownership Possesses Immense Superiority

The replacement of capitalist private ownership by socialist state
ownership represents a revolutionary leap in production relations. The
socialist system of state ownership is a public ownership system in
which both the means of production and the products are possessed by the
proletarian state representing the whole laboring people. The appearance
of the socialist system of state ownership shows that the liberated
laboring people have not only become the ruling class of society, but
have also become masters of the economy.

In China, the scope of socialist state ownership includes mineral
deposits, rivers, and territorial waters; forests, virgin land, and
other natural resources designated to the state by law; and enterprises
such as railways, postal and communications services, banks, state
plants, farms, and commerce. As the representative of the whole laboring
people, the state owns the means of production and sees that they are
allocated rationally and in a unified manner. This creates a new
situation in human history in which, for the first time, the national
economy is systematically developed, and it paves the way for the
development of social productive forces.

The socialist state ownership system is a socialist public ownership
system that conforms to the highly social nature of production. In
modern industries, departments and enterprises are interconnected and
mutually dependent. They are all integral organic constituents of the
whole social production. The appearance of the socialist system of state
ownership is an inevitable {result of the contradiction
between the highly social productive forces and capitalist private
ownership in modern industries. Only with socialist state ownership can
the contradictions between the social nature of production and the
private ownership of the means of production in the capitalist society
and the contradiction between the organized nature of production in
individual enterprises and the chaotic nature of production in the whole
society be resolved; only thus can the serious waste and destruction of
productive forces and products due to the capitalist system and the
extravagant waste practiced by the bourgeoisie and its political
representatives be eliminated. The large quantities of the means of
production and products thus saved for the whole society can be used to
promote a more rapid development of the productive forces.

The state economy based on the socialist system of state ownership
controls the lifeblood of the national economy. It possesses modern
industries and transportation industries. State-operated industries
furnish large quantities of machines, materials, equipment, fuels, and
motive power to promote technical improvement in various departments of
the national economy. They furnish large quantities of tractors,
harvesters, transport equipment, electricity, fuels, chemical
fertilizers, and pesticides to promote agricultural mechanization. They
also accumulate large quantities of capital for the economic, cultural
and defense constructions of the state. The socialist state economy is
an economic factor that occupies a leading role in the whole national
economy. It is the material basis from which the state pursues socialist
revolution and construction. The socialist transformation of
agriculture, the handicraft industry, and capitalist industry and
commerce in China was realized under the leadership and guidance of the
state economy. After the socialist transformation was basically
completed, the consolidation and development of the collective economy
was also related to the leading role of the state economy. The socialist
state economy is a strong material force for consolidating proletarian
dictatorship.

In agriculture, the economy under the socialist state ownership
system is mainly the state farm. In China, the state farm
assumes some roles different from the collective economy: (1) In
addition to capital accumulated by the farm itself, investment can also
come directly from the state when necessary to accelerate agricultural
mechanization to permit the state farm to play a leading and
demonstrating role. (2) The state farm is an important base for the
state to conduct agricultural scientific experiments. Scientific
experiments that require more specialized research personnel, more
funds, and a long period to arrive at useful results often cannot be
conducted by the collective economy in the countryside because of
manpower, material, and financial constraints. The state farm, on the
other hand, can concentrate manpower, material resources, and funds
under a unified plan to conduct various scientific experiments and
extend the useful results --- superior strains and advanced experience
--- to agricultural people's communes in good time. (3) The state farm
is superior to the collective economy in the large-scale reclamation of
virgin land, afforestation, and lumbering.

In China, there is still another form of the socialist state ownership
system. This is the production and construction military corps. It is a
comprehensive economic unit under the state ownership system which
includes agriculture, industry, transportation, and construction. It is
usually established in frontier areas with extensive lands and sparse
population and performs an important task in building and defending the
frontier region and strengthening national defense. The old workers,
revolutionary cadres, and educated youths working in the production and
construction military corps are an industrial army engaged in economic
construction and also a strong combat army in defending the frontier
region. This form of economy under the state ownership system assumes a
special significance in consolidating proletarian dictatorship.

[There Will Be No Completed Socialism without Agricultural Socialization](#)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### It Is Necessary to Subject the Small Peasant Economy to Socialist Transformation

After the proletariat seizes political power, it is often faced with a
large number of individual economies in addition to highly social
capitalist economies. These economic components can be found in
agriculture, the handicraft industry, transportation, and commerce but
are most numerous and widespread in agriculture. Those participating in
individual economic activities are individual laborers. The individual
household is a unit of production and operation. Though they do possess
some negligible amount of the means of production, their lot is
uncertain, and they can be reduced to bankruptcy at any moment by the
capitalist economy. When the proletariat overthrows bourgeois rule and
establishes a socialist state ownership system of the means of
production, can the individual economies be allowed to continue their
operation? No. Chairman Mao said, "Socialism is not completely
consolidated without agricultural socialization."
<a id="8">[[8]](#bot_8)</a> Here, what we have
to analyze is the issue of what road individual agricultural economies
should follow under the socialist condition, because the road followed
by individual agricultural economies is also in principle the road
followed by other individual economies, such as the individual
handicraft industry.

The socialist state ownership system established by the proletariat
after the seizure of political power is the economic basis of the state
under proletarian dictatorship. But, as a form of private economy, the
small peasant economy is in conflict with the socialist public ownership
system and with the superstructure of proletarian dictatorship. Because
of this, the small peasant economy based on private ownership is a
hotbed of capitalism. It will certainly polarize the peasantry into a
majority of poor peasants and farm laborers and a minority of rich
peasants who constitute the bourgeoisie in the countryside. Lenin
pointed out, "Small-scale production regularly,
continually, spontaneously, and abundantly produces capitalism and the
bourgeoisie." <a id="9">[[9]](#bot_9)</a> In
China's people's democratic revolution, thoroughly reforming the land
system, confiscating land from the feudal class, and distributing it to
the peasants in order to liberate the broad masses of peasants from the
feudal system was a great victory. But after land reform, there is still
a question of where the individual peasants should go. Should they
follow the capitalist road or the socialist road? After China's land
reform, the following conditions appeared within a few years:
Spontaneous capitalist tendencies developed steadily. New rich peasants
appeared everywhere, and many rich middle peasants tried very hard to
become rich peasants. Many poor peasants were still suffering from
poverty because of insufficient means of production. Many of them were
in debt. Some had to sell or rent their land. These conditions
demonstrated that if after land reform the proletariat did not
immediately lead the broad masses of peasants to take the socialist road
and subject the small peasant economy to socialist transformation in
good time but instead let it polarize, then those rich middle peasants
who were bent on taking the capitalist road would be further and further
removed from the interests of the working class, and those peasants who
had recently lost their land again and were still beset by poverty would
also complain that the proletariat did not rescue them and help them
solve their problems. Thus the worker-peasant alliance established on
the basis of land reform would face the danger of collapse. It would
also threaten proletarian dictatorship and the consolidation of the
socialist economic basis.

After land reform, the small peasant economy based on private ownership
played a certain role in recovering and developing agricultural
production. But it was, after all, a backward production relation.
Individual and scattered operation made it impossible to adopt advanced
techniques and modern farm tools, powerless against natural calamities,
and impossible to sustain expanded reproduction. Therefore, it was not
capable of satisfying the socialist economy's demand for commodity
food grain, industrial raw materials, and increased labor
power; nor could it provide a large domestic market for industrial
development, and it was thus in sharp conflict with socialist
industrialization. To resolve this contradiction, it was necessary for
the proletariat to take suitable measures to lead the scattered and
backward small peasant economy onto the socialist road.

How can the small peasant economy be led onto the socialist road?

### Getting Organized Is a Necessary Road for the Socialist Transformation of the Small Peasant Economy

The peasant is a laborer and is an ally of the proletariat. The means of
production privately owned by the individual peasant cannot be
expropriated. Engels once pointed out: 'When we control the state power,
we will never use force to expropriate the small peasant (it is the same
whether the expropriation is paid for or not) as we must do with the big
landowners. Our task with the small peasant is first of all to convert
private production and possession into production and possession by the
cooperative, not through force, but through demonstration and social
assistance." <a id="10">[[10]](#bot_10)</a>
This is to say, agricultural cooperativization is realized by getting
organized. "This is a necessary road through which the people become
liberated and a necessary road from poverty to affluence."
<a id="11">[[11]](#bot_11)</a> In China, the
broad masses of poor and lower-middle peasants were quite susceptible to
socialist transformation. Among them was an immense activism for the
socialist road. Part of the rich middle peasants were skeptical of the
socialist road, while the landlords and rich peasants tried hard to
sabotage it. Therefore, on the question of whether agricultural
cooperativization should be implemented, there existed from the very
beginning a serious struggle between the socialist and the capitalist
roads. This struggle was manifested as a serious struggle between the
two lines when it was reflected in the Party itself.

The Liu Shao-ch'i and Ch'en Po-ta clique, representing the
interests of the bourgeoisie and the rich peasants, proposed a
revisionist line of "mechanization first, cooperativization later." They
attacked with full force, saying that to realize cooperativization
before mechanization was "erroneous, dangerous, and illusory
agricultural socialism," in a vain attempt to lead the individualistic
economy onto the evil road of capitalism. The Party Central Committee
headed by Chairman Mao resolutely defended the interests of the
proletariat and the poor and lower-middle peasants. It analyzed the
actual conditions of China's countryside and formulated a basic Party
line for agriculture: the first step was to implement agricultural
collectivization, and the second step was to achieve agricultural
mechanization on the basis of agricultural collectivization. This was a
Marxist line. To counter the fallacies peddled by Liu Shao-ch'i and
company, Chairman Mao pointed out, "Under the present conditions in our
country, we must have cooperativization before we can have massive
mechanization (in capitalist countries agriculture has turned into
capitalism)." <a id="12">[[12]](#bot_12)</a>
Chairman Mao's revolutionary line was thoroughly implemented in China.
In the process of agricultural cooperativization, the whole Party firmly
relied on the poor and lower-middle peasants to unit solidly with other
middle peasants to wage a resolute struggle against the landlords and
the rich peasants and effectively boycotted the revisionist line of the
Liu Shao-ch'i clique. As a result, agricultural cooperativization was
realized triumphantly in a very short time.

The process of China's socialist transformation of agriculture was the
process of contradiction between the production relations and the
productive forces in the countryside. The process of transformation went
through three stages, proceeding step by step one after another. In the
beginning, mutual-aid teams with certain socialist elements were
organized to train the peasants in collective labor in order to
demonstrate that their production would increase faster than that of the
individual operations. But there was a contradiction between group labor
and scattered operation in the mutual-aid team. Had this contradiction
not been resolved, it would have been difficult to further
exploit the superiority of getting organized. At that time, guided by
circumstances, the peasants were led to organize primitive agricultural
production cooperatives of a semisocialist nature. In these primitive
cooperatives, privately owned land was jointly operated by the
cooperative, while privately owned livestock and large farm tools were
jointly used by the cooperative, thus resolving the contradiction
between group labor and scattered operation in the mutual-aid team.
Production was further promoted. But the primitive cooperative still
retained "land dividends" and certain remuneration for the use of
privately owned livestock and large farm tools. The private ownership
system of the means of production had not been abolished. There still
existed a contradiction between joint operation and collective labor and
the private ownership of land and other means of production. Had this
contradiction not been resolved, the activism of the broad poor and
lower-middle peasants would not have been fully mobilized. At that time,
guided by circumstances, the Party once again led the peasants to form
completely socialist advanced agricultural production cooperatives.
Based on the system of collective ownership of the means of production
by the laboring masses, the advanced cooperative implemented the
socialist principle of "from each according to his ability and to each
according to his labor." It was a completely socialist collective
economy. The policy of proceeding phase by phase according to the actual
circumstances was instrumental in gradually accustoming the peasant to
collective labor and collective operation, getting him to relinquish the
concept of private ownership, and mobilizing his socialist activism to
willingly join the cooperative. Therefore, in the whole process of
cooperativization, not only was agricultural production not reduced, it
increased year after year, fully demonstrating the incomparable
correctness of Chairman Mao's revolutionary line.

After completing land reform, the socialist transformation of
agriculture was basically completed in China's broad countryside in less
than four years. Agricultural cooperativization was
realized, and the vast individual ownership system was transformed into
a socialist collective ownership system of the laboring people. The
realization of agricultural cooperativization further liberated the
productive forces, strengthened the socialist stronghold of the
proletariat in the broad countryside, consolidated the worker-peasant
alliance, and consolidated proletarian dictatorship. The implications of
this were profound.

### China's Rural People's Commune Is an Important Development of the Collective Ownership System

After the establishment of the socialist system of collective ownership
by the laboring masses, there followed a process of gradual development
and improvement. With the development of the productive forces and the
elevation of the socialist consciousness of the laboring masses, small
collectives developed into bigger collectives, and collectives with a
lesser degree of public ownership developed into collectives with a
higher degree of public ownership. This is an objective law. In 1958,
under the guidance of the Party's General Line for Socialist
Construction, under the impetus of the Great Leap Forward, and in
accordance with the need for developing the productive forces in the
countryside, China's rural people's commune rose over the broad horizon
of East Asia like an early rising sun. The broad masses of poor and
lower-middle peasants dearly loved the people's commune. They wrote
numerous folk songs to praise its birth. One of them went as follows:

> Individual operation is like a single plank bridge,\
> It rocks three times with every step;\
> Mutual aid is like a stone bridge,\
> That does not stand up well to wind and rain;\
> The iron bridge is not bad,\
> But it cannot handle heavy traffic;\
> The people's commune is a golden bridge,\
> That leads the way to Heaven.

The scale of the people's commune was one per
[hsiang], formed by merging several advanced agricultural
production cooperatives in a [hsiang]. It is an organization
combining administration with production and includes the worker, the
peasant (including forestry, livestock husbandry, sidelines, and
fishery), the trader, the student, and the soldier. It is the basic unit
of China's socialist society in the countryside. It is also a basic unit
of China's government in the countryside. For a fairly long historical
period to come, it will be the collective economic organization of
socialism based on mutual aid and benefit. However, when the advanced
agricultural cooperative developed into the people's commune, the scale
of operation was expanded, and the share of the means of production
owned by the public was also increased. Its characteristic was "big and
public." This was an important development in China's socialist system
of collective ownership by the laboring masses.

At the present stage, the basic system of "three-level ownership with
the production team as the basis" is in force in China's rural people's
communes. In the three-level ownership system, the collective ownership
system at the commune and brigade levels is partial. The collective
ownership system at the production team level is basic. The production
team is the basic accounting unit in the people's commune. It has
independent accounting and is responsible for all its profit and loss.
It directly organizes production and distribution. This is because
agricultural production at the present stage still basically relies on
manual labor and draft animals. Although the degree of agricultural
mechanization steadily increased after the establishment of the people's
commune, the condition of manual labor is still dominant over the
country as a whole. At the present stage, it is generally appropriate to
have twenty to thirty households in a production team, forming a basic
accounting unit for organizing production and distribution. This is
favorable to organizing production and strengthening management,
mobilizing the socialist activism of the broad commune members,
inspiring them to be more concerned with the collective and
strengthening the supervision of cadres. Above the production
team, there are the collective economies of the brigade and
the commune. With the development of the collective economy in which the
degree of socialization in these two levels is comparatively high, it is
financially possible to purchase large- and medium-size farm machinery,
engage in rural capital construction, such as water conservation and the
running of small factories and mining enterprises, and at key points,
assist weak production teams to hasten the development of the collective
economy. These activities are too big for the production team to carry
out. Collective ownership with three different levels constitutes the
basic unit of economic accounting of the rural people's commune. It is
an indivisible, integral unit. Such collective ownership comprising
three levels is exceedingly flexible in coping with the different
conditions and diversified demands accrued in developing rural
productive forces and is therefore conducive to the rapid development of
social productivity.

In the collective economy of China's rural people's commune, the commune
member is permitted and encouraged to make use of his free time and
holidays to engage in family sidelines (including self-retained land
assigned to him) as long as the collective economy is first well taken
care of, its development is not hindered, and it is in a dominant
position. Family sidelines are remnants of the individual economy. But
under socialism, they supplement the socialist economy and are
subordinate to the economy based on the collective ownership system and
the state ownership system. For a period of time during socialism, the
retention of family sidelines by the commune member can help to fully
utilize the labor power of the countryside, increase the social product,
improve the livelihood of the commune member, and enliven the rural
trade fair. But leadership must be strengthened to prevent aimless
drift.

The collective ownership system of China's rural people's commune with
"three-level ownership and with the production team as the basis" will
stay as it is for years to come. However, with the gradual improvement
of various conditions (for example, with a higher degree of agricultural
mechanization, a smaller gap in the income among production
teams, and the gradual elevation of the socialist consciousness of the
broad commune members), China's rural people's commune will gradually
pass from the present ownership system based on the production team to a
future ownership system based on the brigade and the commune, and then
from there gradually to a socialist state ownership system. This will be
a long process of gradual development.

Like the collective ownership system in agriculture, the collective
ownership system of the handicraft industry also involves a long process
of passing from small collectives to big collectives and then from big
collectives to a socialist state ownership system.

The development of the collective ownership system from the small to the
big, from the low to the high, and from collective ownership to state
ownership is all based on a gradual improvement of the productive forces
and the socialist consciousness of the people. It would be a mistake to
attempt to change the situation in a hurry when the necessary conditions
do not exist. It would also be a mistake to be content with the status
quo when the necessary conditions do exist. These two tendencies will
discourage the socialist activism of the masses and are unfavorable to
the development of the productive forces. They may even impede the
development of the productive forces. In the process of transforming the
advanced agricultural production cooperative to the rural people's
commune in China, these two tendencies did exist. The appearance of the
people's commune is a natural result of the economic and political
development in China and is completely in line with the phenomena of
objective laws. But the revisionist clique of Liu Shao-ch'i and Lin Piao
maliciously attacked the formation of the people's commune as "premature
and messy." When the strong tide of the people's commune overwhelmed the
countercurrent fanned up by them, they clamored for "a leap toward
communism," urging the start of a "communist wind" in a vain attempt to
sabotage the socialist character of the people's commune. From now on,
there will be struggle between the two classes, the two
roads, and the two lines in the development process of the
economy based on a socialist collective ownership system of the laboring
masses. This is inevitable and not in the least surprising.

Although the socialist collective ownership system of the masses and the
state ownership system are both socialist public ownership, they are
different. The economy's means of production under collective ownership
are not the public property of the country's laboring masses, but are
the property of the laborers of the cooperative. Therefore, manpower,
materials, and financial resources are not transferable without
compensation between the state and the cooperative; nor are they
transferable without compensation between cooperatives. The existing
disparities in income levels between cooperatives cannot be artificially
eliminated. The only way to do it is to help the low-income cooperatives
to grasp revolution and raise labor productivity in order to gradually
narrow the gap.

[The Socialist Public Ownership System Consolidates and Develops through Struggle](#)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Serious Lesson of the Restoration of the Capitalist Ownership System in the Soviet Union

Since the Khrushchev-Brezhnev renegade clique restored bourgeois
dictatorship, the socialist public ownership system established under
proletarian dictatorship has been completely transformed into a new
system of ownership by the bureaucratic monopolist bourgeoisie. This is
a serious lesson. The event demonstrates that after the establishment of
the socialist public ownership system, the two possibilities of advance
in the communist direction or retreat in the capitalist direction still
exist.

Marxism tells us that the nature of the ownership system of the means of
production is ultimately determined by which social group possesses the
means of production and which social groups they serve. How
should we observe such possession and service? In _Capital_,
Marx quoted Aristotle's remark that "the status of the master rests not
so much on he who purchases the slave as on he who lords over him." Marx
continued, "the status of the capitalist is established not so much by
his ownership of the capital --- which provides him the power to
purchase labor --- as by his power to employ the laborer, that is, the
wage earner, in the process of production."
<a id="13">[[13]](#bot_13)</a>

Today, a glimpse at the way the Soviet proletariat and laboring people
are employed will demonstrate the substance of Soviet revisionism, that
is, that Brezhnev and his associates, wearing a cloak of socialist
public ownership, have usurped the Soviet people's means of production
to serve the bureaucratic monopolist bourgeoisie.

In the regulations governing the socialist state-operated production
enterprises, the Soviet revisionists stipulate: "The authority over
production and management shall be exercised by the manager
(administrator or director) in conjunction with other responsible
personnel designated in accordance with the division of their duties."
The manager of the enterprise has the authority to determine the level
of employment and the strength of the personnel; to recruit or dismiss
employees; to grant awards or mete out penalties; to fix wage scales and
bonuses; to sell, rent, or lease the means of production of the
enterprise; and to appropriate various "economic incentive funds" which
are stipulated by the Soviet revisionist leadership as being reserved
for the enterprise's own allocation.

The Soviet revisionist "Regulations Governing the Model Collective
Farms" stipulate that the chairman of the collective farm possesses the
authority to rent, lease, or transfer the land owned by the state; to
appropriate farm funds, or even to freely buy or sell the means of
production, such as agricultural machines; and to decide the labor
remuneration and bonuses of the farm members, hire outside people to
work at the farm, and so forth. These "managers," or "farm chairmen,"
have this and that power. What powers do the laboring people have? None.
Their ownership rights to the means of production have all
been expropriated by the bureaucratic monopolist bourgeoisie. By
reducing the laboring people of the Soviet Union to wage laborers "in
the production process," the bureaucratic monopolist bourgeoisie has
proved that it is the bureaucratic monopolist bourgeoisie. According to
Soviet revisionist magazines, the monthly piecework wages of a lathe
operator in a state enterprise in the Soviet Union are as low as 50 to
60 rubles. Medium wages are 70 to 80 rubles. But what the manager, plant
director, and other bureaucratic monopolist bourgeois elements get in
the way of wages, bonuses, subsidies, and other "legal" means is more
than ten times, or even several tens of times, that of the worker. The
net monthly income of an ordinary farmer is less than 60 rubles. But the
monthly income of a farm chairman is generally about 300 rubles. Some
reach more than 1,000 rubles. One old Soviet worker with more than
thirty years of experience said: 'We have a lot of millionaires here."
"They are different from us not only in standard of living but also in
language." A manager of the construction trust of the Soviet revisionist
Ministry of Agriculture frantically exclaimed: "The trust is my home. I
am the master. I do what I like." The kind of tree determines the kind
of flower, and the kind of class determines the kind of talk. From their
different standpoints and different angles, the laboring people and the
bureaucratic monopolist bourgeoisie demonstrate one point: The
bureaucratic monopolist bourgeoisie has become the lords in production.
Like the capitalists, they "do what they like." On the other hand, the
broad masses of laboring people have been reduced to wage laborers in
production. They are enslaved and exploited and are suffering miserably.

The fact that the socialist public ownership system of the Soviet Union
has completely degenerated is shocking. This demonstrates that after the
socialist public ownership system is established, it will not
automatically consolidate and become perfect; there will be a long
process of struggle.

The ownership system is not an object; it is a social relationship. The
socialist public ownership system embodies, for the laboring people, a
social relationship in which the means of production are
equally possessed and everybody is a master. On the other hand, it also
embodies a relationship in which the proletariat and the laboring people
expropriate the expropriator and rule over and transform all members of
the exploiting class. In these social relationships, the proletariat and
the laboring people must consolidate their gains obtained through
expropriation, strengthen the rule over, and the transformation of,
members of the exploiting class in order to consolidate and perfect the
socialist public ownership system by constantly sweeping away the
corrosion and sabotage of the exploiting class. On the other hand, the
bourgeoisie and all exploiting classes will resist this kind of rule and
transformation in order to transform the socialist public ownership
system into a capitalist private ownership system through constant
corrosion and sabotage. The contradictions and the struggles between the
proletariat and the bourgeoisie on the question of the ownership system
are multifaceted. But they are mainly manifested in the struggle for
leadership over the economy which is based on a socialist public
ownership system. Whoever seizes leadership becomes the de facto master
of the ownership relations. Once the leadership falls into the hands of
the bourgeoisie or its agents, the socialist public ownership system not
only cannot be consolidated or improved, it will certainly degenerate.
It is exactly because a handful of persons in power in the Soviet Union
taking the capitalist road has stolen the leadership of the economy
based on a socialist public ownership system that the socialist public
ownership system has been transformed into an ownership system of the
bureaucratic monopolist bourgeoisie and that the proletariat and the
laboring people of the Soviet Union have been transformed from masters
of a socialist public ownership system into slaves of an ownership
system of the bureaucratic monopolist bourgeoisie. Since the
Khrushchev-Brezhnev renegade clique usurped the supreme power of the
Soviet Union's Party and state, capitalism has been completely restored.

### Struggle for the Consolidation and Development of the Socialist Public Ownership System

After the establishment of socialist public ownership, the issue of the
ownership system has still not been completely resolved. There still
exist the two possibilities of advancing toward socialism or retreating
back to capitalism. This reveals to the proletariat and the broad masses
of laboring people an historical task: they must constantly struggle for
the consolidation and development of the socialist public ownership
system.

To consolidate and develop the socialist public ownership system, it is
necessary first of all to ensure that the socialist economic leadership
is in the hands of the Marxists and the broad laboring masses.

The socialist public ownership system demonstrates that the proletariat
and the laboring people are the masters of the means of production. But,
how can one tell whether they are in fact masters of the means of
production? That depends on their role in the production process. In
capitalist society, the laborer is used in the production process as
labor power by the capitalist. Through the use of labor power, the
capitalist extracts as much surplus value from the laborer as possible.
The laborer is merely a paid slave. The capitalist is the real master.
This leads to acute opposition between the worker and the capitalist. In
socialist society, the role of the laborers in the production process is
completely different. They participate in the production process as
masters. They create wealth for society through conscious labor. Then,
who organizes this production process? Ultimately, it should be the
laborer himself. Naturally, this does not mean that all laborers
directly organize and manage production. The broad laborers appoint
representatives through the state and the collective, or they elect
representatives to organize production. But here a problem arises: If
the broad laborers delegate to their representatives the power to
organize production, can these representatives represent the interests
of the proletariat and the laboring people in organizing
production? After the laborer has delegated his power to
organize production to a representative, is there any power left to the
laborer himself? This problem has occurred in history. At the end of the
primitive commune, public servants of society elected by commune members
gradually became masters of society, and this finally led to the
disintegration of the ownership system of clan communes and the
emergence of private ownership. This reflected a progressive movement in
history at that time. In today's Soviet Union, those who organize
production do not represent the interests of the proletariat and the
laboring people at all. They represent instead the interests of the
bureaucratic monopolist bourgeoisie. The socialist public ownership
system of the bureaucratic monopolist bourgeoisie has become the
economic basis of Soviet society. This is a big historical
retrogression. Under China's proletarian dictatorship, similar
conditions have appeared in certain areas. Before the Great Proletarian
Cultural Revolution, the real leadership of some units, though nominally
under the socialist public ownership system, had been usurped by a
handful of renegades, special agents, and capitalist-roaders. Or it was
still in the hands of former capitalists. As a result of the Great
Proletarian Cultural Revolution launched and led by Chairman Mao
personally, the leadership of these units was returned to the broad
laboring masses who held high the red banner that "it is justified to
rebel against the reactionary," and "lessons from history are
noteworthy." The Tenth National Party Congress summed up rich experience
and lessons and clearly pointed out: "Leadership in the base
organization must be strengthened so that the leadership is really in
the hands of the Marxists, the workers, the poor and lower-middle
peasants, and other laboring masses. The task of consolidating
proletarian revolution must be put into effect in every base unit."
<a id="14">[[14]](#bot_14)</a> This has
decisive significance in consolidating and developing the socialist
public ownership system.

To ensure that the leadership of the enterprise under the state economy
and the collective economy is in the hands of the Marxists, the
proletariat and the laboring people must engage in a
resolute struggle with the renegades, special agents, and
capitalist-roaders who have usurped the leadership and win it back. This
type of struggle cannot be resolved with one Great Cultural Revolution.
In their futile restoration attempt, the bourgeoisie will try everything
to usurp the leadership of the state and the collective economy. At the
same time, the representatives (cadres of various levels) of the
proletariat and the laboring people who control the leadership of the
state and the collective economy must strengthen the transformation of
their world outlook and try hard to become Marxists so that they can
truly represent the interests of the proletariat and the laboring
people. If they do not work hard in this direction, it is possible that
under the influence of the bourgeois world outlook, they may go against
the interests of the proletariat and the laboring people in the process
of organizing production. Some people are interested in material
incentives, profit, and restrictive measures in their operation and
management of the socialist economy. In other words, they do not treat
the laboring people as the masters of the socialist enterprise. This
will inevitably impede and weaken the socialist public ownership system.
If this trend continues, the socialist public ownership system will
degenerate. In the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution, the broad
masses and cadres criticized and repudiated this tendency. But, under
certain conditions, things that have been criticized and repudiated can
appear again. At the beginning of 1974, some of the workers in the No. 5
Loading and Unloading District of the Shanghai Harbor Affairs Bureau
posted a big-character poster entitled "Be the Masters of the Wharf, Not
the Slaves of Tonnage." It pointed out: "The leadership does not treat
the workers as masters of the wharf. Instead they are treated as the
slaves of tonnage. This is a reflection of the revisionist line in
running an enterprise." These words hit the crux of the consolidation
and development of the socialist public ownership system and are of
universal practical significance.

In order that the leadership of the state economy and the collective
economy really be in the hands of the Marxist, it must also really be in
the hands of the workers, poor and lower-middle peasants,
and other laboring masses. These two aspects are inseparable. Since the
laboring masses are the masters of the socialist economy, it does not
mean that they no longer have the right to interfere once the leadership
has been delegated to a few representatives. The revisionist "one-head
system\" championed by the Soviet revisionists is an
institutionalization of this viewpoint. Facts have demonstrated that
this is a chloroform spread by the bourgeoisie and its agents in order
to usurp leadership. Engels once pointed out: "The inevitable result of
individual management of industries is private ownership.\"
<a id="15">[[15]](#bot_15)</a> If the
leadership of the enterprise under the socialist ownership system is not
in the hands of the workers, poor and lower-middle peasants, and other
laborers, the revisionist "one-head system\" will proliferate. Under the
revisionist "one-head system,\" the laboring masses are in effect
separated from the means of production. They listen to the orders from
the "head.\" Without leadership over the enterprise, they are no longer
masters of the enterprise. If this develops, they will be treated as
pure labor power in the production process by the "head.\" The laboring
masses will no longer have the right to question whether this production
process serves the interests of the proletariat and the laboring people.
This way, socialist enterprises will gradually slide into the mudhole of
capitalism. But when leadership of the enterprise is really in the hands
of the Marxists and the workers, poor and lower-middle peasants, and
other laboring masses, the position of the laboring masses as masters of
the enterprise will surely be guaranteed. As masters, they will fully
mobilize socialist activism. If some bad people usurped leadership of
the enterprise, the laboring masses would take it back under the Party's
leadership. This has been proven more than once by the practice of
China's socialist revolution, especially since the Great Proletarian
Cultural Revolution. It will be proven again.

The crux of the question concerning who controls the leadership of the
socialist economy lies in whether or not the line implemented by the
departments in charge of production operation or economic management
represents the interests of the proletariat and the
laboring people. The revisionist line always goes against the interests
of the proletariat and the laboring people. It fosters material
incentives, profit, and restrictive measures. On the other hand,
according to socialist principles, the Marxist line always insists on
having revolution guide production and strengthening operation
management by relying on the masses as the masters. Therefore, firmly
adhering to the Marxist line and criticizing and repudiating the
revisionist line is the ultimate guarantee for the consolidation and
development of the socialist public ownership system.

To consolidate and develop the socialist public ownership system, it is
also necessary to implement various policies of the Party. Party
policies are concrete manifestations of the Party line. To firmly adhere
to the proletarian revolutionary line, it is necessary to seriously
implement various policies of the Party. For example, it is necessary to
correctly handle the relations between the center and the locality to
mobilize dual activism within the economy under the state ownership
system, and it is necessary to correctly handle the relations between
the state and the enterprise so that the enterprise can fully take the
initiative in operation and management under the unified leadership of
the state. Also, in the collective economy of the rural people's
commune, it is necessary to correctly implement the present stage's
basic system of "three-level ownership with the production team as the
basis" in order to fully mobilize the socialist activism of the
three-level collective economy of the commune, the brigade, and the
production team. While acknowledging the existence of disparities among
brigades, among teams, and among communes, we must strive to create
favorable conditions narrowing such disparities in order to follow the
socialist path to common affluence.

To consolidate and develop the socialist public ownership system,
socialist education must be strengthened. The socialist public ownership
system is built on the basis of eliminating the private ownership
system. But "remnants reflecting the old system and the old ideology
will long stay in people's minds and will not retreat easily."
<a id="16">[[16]](#bot_16)</a>
This remnant of the old ideology based on the old private ownership
system is manifested in many aspects. It is in conflict with the
socialist public ownership system. Only by strengthening education on
ideology and political line, constantly elevating the political
consciousness of the broad cadres and masses, and firmly establishing
the proletarian world outlook can the consolidation and development of
the socialist public ownership system be effectively promoted.

To consolidate and develop the socialist public ownership system, it is
also necessary to enthusiastically develop social productive forces. The
socialist public ownership system creates favorable conditions for the
development of social productive forces, while the further development
of social productive forces must provide a material basis for the
further consolidation and development of the socialist public ownership
system. The acceleration of socialist industrialization will strengthen
the socialist state economy. The acceleration of agricultural
mechanization and the constant development of agricultural productive
forces will strengthen the collective economy and thus promote the
further consolidation and development of the collective ownership
system. Therefore, resolutely implementing the policy to "grasp
revolution, promote production" and developing the socialist economy
with greater, faster, and better results at lower costs are important
conditions for the consolidation and development of the socialist public
ownership system.

The process of consolidating and developing the socialist public
ownership system is a long process of struggle between the two classes,
the two roads, and the two lines. The road of struggle is very long, the
task is very heavy, and we must fight with all our strength!

### Major Study References

Marx, _Communist Manifesto_.

Lenin, "On Food Grain Tax," _Selected Works of Lenin_.

Chairman Mao, "Report to the Second Plenum of the Seventh
Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party."

Chairman Mao, "On the Correct Handling of Contradictions among the
People," Sections 3-4.

Chairman Mao, "On Agricultural Cooperativization."

### Review Problems

1\. How does the socialist state ownership system emerge? Why do we say
it is the main economic basis of proletarian dictatorship?

2\. Why do we say that socialism is not completely consolidated without
agricultural socialization? Why did the rural people's commune of China
adopt the system of "three-level ownership with the production team as
the basis" at the present stage?

3\. How can the socialist public ownership system be continually
consolidated and developed? How do we consolidate and develop the
socialist public ownership system?

Notes
-------------------

<a id="bot_s_a">[[\*]](#s_a)</a> She-hui-chu-i kung-yu chih shih she-hui-chu-i
sheng-ch'an kuan-hsi ti chi-ch'u --- she-hui-chu-i kuo-chia so-yu chih
ho lao-tung ch'n-chung chi-t'i so-yu chih.

<a id="bot_1">[[1]](#1)</a> Engels, _Anti-Duhring_, _Selected
Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 3, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she,
1972, p. 201.

<a id="bot_2">[[2]](#2)</a> Marx, _Critique of the Gotha
Program_, _Selected Works of Marx and Engels_,
Vol. 3, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 5.

<a id="bot_3">[[3]](#3)</a> _Communist Manifesto_, _Selected
Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 1, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she,
1972, p. 272.

<a id="bot_4">[[4]](#4)</a> "The Present Situation and Our Tasks,"
_Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung_, Vol. 4, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 1149.

<a id="bot_5">[[5]](#5)</a> "Report to the Second Plenum of the Seventh
Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party," _Selected Works of
Mao Tse-tung_, Vol. 4, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 1321.

<a id="bot_6">[[6]](#6)</a> "On the Navet of the 'Leftist'
and the Class Nature of the Petty Bourgeoisie," _Selected Works of
Lenin_, Vol.3, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 548.

<a id="bot_7">[[7]](#7)</a> "Political Report to the Central Committee of
the Russian Communist Party (Bolshevik)" _Selected Works of
Lenin_, Vol. 4, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 627.

<a id="bot_8">[[8]](#8)</a> "On the People's Democratic Dictatorship,"
_Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung_, Vol. 4, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 1366.

<a id="bot_9">[[9]](#9)</a> "'Leftist\* Naivete' in the Communist
Movement," _Selected Works of Lenin_, Vol. 4, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 181.

<a id="bot_10">[[10]](#10)</a> Engels, "The Question of the French and
German Peasant," _Selected Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol.
4, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 310.

<a id="bot_11">[[11]](#11)</a> "Get Organized!" _Selected Works of Mao
Tse-tung_, Vol. 3, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 886.

<a id="bot_12">[[12]](#12)</a> "On Agricultural Cooperativization,"
_Selected Readings from the Works of Mao Tse-tung_, (Type
A), Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1965, p. 308.

<a id="bot_13">[[13]](#13)</a> Marx, _Capital_, Vol. 3,
Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1966, p. 438.

<a id="bot_14">[[14]](#14)</a> Chou En-lai, "Report to the Tenth National
Congress of the Chinese Communist Party," _Collected Documents from the
Tenth National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party_,
Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1973, pp. 32-33.

<a id="bot_15">[[15]](#15)</a> Engels, "Principles of Communism,"
_Selected Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 1, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 217.

<a id="bot_16">[[16]](#16)</a> Chairman Mao, "Notes on 'A Serious
Lesson,'" _Socialist Upsurge in China's Countryside_, Vol.
1, p. 123.
