[*14* Establish Interpersonal Relations according to Socialist Principles](#) 
================================================================================================================

[People's Status and Their Interrelations in Socialist
Production](#)<a id="s_a">[\*](#bot_s_a)</a>

People's status and their interrelations are an important component of
production relations. After the establishment of the socialist public
ownership system of the means of production, it is very important to
shape the people's status and their interrelations to be compatible with
this form of ownership system. If this middle link of production
relations is grasped and continually improved, the socialist public
ownership system and distribution relations will continually be
consolidated and developed.

[People's Status and Their Interrelations Have Undergone a Fundamental Change](#)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _The Socialist Public Ownership System Is a Negation of All Exploitative Systems_

In history, people's status and their interrelations in production have
always been determined by the ownership system of the means
of production. The system of slave ownership determined the relationship
between the slave owner and his slaves. The ownership system of the
feudal lords determined the relationship between the landlord and the
peasant. The ownership system of the capitalist determined the
relationship between the capitalist and the worker. The relationship of
exploitation between the capitalist and the worker is more obscure than
the relationship between the slave owner and the slave or between the
landlord and the peasant. Often this relationship involves goods and is
manifested as the relationship among goods. For a long time, bourgeois
economists have written books and fabricated theories on the
relationships among goods in an attempt to conceal the reality of class
antagonism among people. "Wherever the bourgeois economists saw a
relationship among goods (commodity exchanges), Marx revealed a
relationship among men."
<a id="1">[[1]](#bot_1)</a> "What economics
studies is not things but interpersonal relations and ultimately inter
class relations." <a id="2">[[2]](#bot_2)</a>

The interrelations in socialist production are established only after
the proletariat and the broad masses of laboring people overthrow the
bourgeois state machinery with violence and establish proletarian
dictatorship and the socialist public ownership system of the means of
production.

In socialist society, the relationship which existed in the old society
between the ruling and the ruled, with the working class and the
collective farmers on one side and the bourgeoisie, the landlords, and
the rich peasants on the other, has been reversed. All exploitative
relations have been negated. This reversal and negation are the
preconditions for transforming the private ownership system of the means
of production into the socialist public ownership system. The socialist
public ownership system is a coercive economic measure. In this system,
the exploitative class is deprived of its means of exploiting the
laboring people and is forced to accept transformation by the
proletariat and the broad masses of laboring people. On the other hand,
with the establishment of the socialist public ownership system, the
proletariat and the broad masses of laboring people, once slaves in the
old society, become masters of the new society. From here
on, the proletariat and the laboring people are in the ruling position
in the socialist production process, and the bourgeoisie and all
exploitative classes are in the position of being ruled. Socialist
interrelations are to be established and developed on this basis.

In the whole socialist historical stage, from beginning to end, there
will exist the struggle between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. On
the one hand, the proletariat and the broad masses of laboring people
will try hard to defend and consolidate their position in socialist
production and the socialist interrelations in order to achieve the
great ideal of realizing communism by eliminating the bourgeoisie and
all exploitative classes and all class disparities. On the other hand,
the bourgeoisie and all exploitative classes will never forget their
past dominant position over the laboring people, the "good old days"
when they could reap without work, and they will vainly attempt to free
themselves from the restrictions imposed on them by the socialist
interrelations and to restore the capitalist relations. Lin Piao's
adherence to Confucius' extremely reactionary political proposal to
"restore fallen states, reinstate their sovereignties, and seek the
counsel of cultivated persons in retirement" was a conspiracy to
retrieve all fallen exploitative classes, pull down the laboring people
as the new masters, and restore the capitalist interrelations.
Therefore, the process of consolidation and development of the socialist
interrelations is essentially a process of struggle between the
proletariat and the bourgeoisie.

### _Socialist Interrelations Still Possess Class Overtones_

In class society, interpersonal relations are ultimately inter-class
relations. How then are the interpersonal relations in socialist
production manifested as interclass relations?

To better understand the class relations in socialist production, it is
necessary to retrace briefly the class relations in semicolonial and
semifeudal China.

The economic substructure of old China gave rise to the
following classes, namely, the proletariat, the peasantry, and the urban
petty bourgeoisie. At that time, the status of these classes and the
inter class relations were as follows: The landlords and the
bureaucratic bourgeoisie who controlled the major means of production
and the reactionary state machinery and colluded with imperialism
occupied a dominant position in social production. They relentlessly
exploited and oppressed the proletariat, the peasantry, and the urban
petty bourgeoisie. The national bourgeoisie also possessed a large
quantity of the means of production. On the one hand, they were
connected in production with imperialism, the landlords, and the
bureaucratic bourgeoisie in their exploitation of the proletariat and
the laboring people. On the other hand, they were boycotted and hurt by
the landlords and the bureaucratic bourgeoisie. The proletariat and the
broad masses of poor peasants were in a helpless position in social
production subject to triple oppression and exploitation from the
imperialists, the feudal forces, and the bourgeoisie.

"To overthrow the old social system and establish a new one is a great
struggle and an immense change in the social system and the
interpersonal relations."
<a id="3">[[3]](#bot_3)</a> When
China entered the historical period of socialist revolution and the
socialist transformation of agriculture, handicraft industry, and
capitalist industry and commerce was basically realized with socialist
public ownership of the means of production as the only economic
substructure, "the interclass relations in the whole countryunder-went
changes." <a id="4">[[4]](#bot_4)</a> The
landlord and the bureaucratic bourgeoisie had already been overthrown
and were in the position of being ruled and transformed through social
production. The means of production belonging to the national
bourgeoisie had already passed into the hands of the proletariat and the
whole laboring people. Having lost their controlling position in
enterprise, the national bourgeoisie had to accept education and
transformation from the working class. The peasants (including
individual handicraftsmen) had been transformed from individual
producers to collective laborers and, with the working class, became
masters of the socialist economy. The urban petty bourgeoisie had been
assimilated into the socialist production relations in the socialist
transformation. The working class had become the leading class in the
country controlling the lifeblood of the socialist economy and occupying
a leading position in the whole social production. The old classes of
the semicolonial and semifeudal society still existed. But their
interclass relations had undergone fundamental changes.

Revisionists from Khrushchev and Brezhnev to Liu Shao-ch'i and Lin Piao
and their associates publicized a platform stating that when the
socialist public ownership system becomes the only economic
substructure, all exploiting classes vanish. Consequently, the
production relations, which include interpersonal relations, lose their
class relation character, and the so-called interpersonal relations
become those among "comrades, friends, and brothers." This fallacy is
totally against Marxism and is inconsistent with the reality of
socialist society.

In socialist society, although the exploiting class has lost its means
of production, it still exists as a class. After the socialist
revolution of the ownership of the means of production is basically
realized, the existence of classes will rest on the people's economic
relations prior to socialist reform and their political positions in the
struggle between socialism and capitalism. In addition, the existence of
classes is related to capitalist traditions and influences that still
remain in socialist society, to the remaining disparities between the
worker and the peasant, the urban and rural areas, and mental and
physical labor, and to the bourgeois legal rights that reflect them. In
fact, in addition to the continuing existence of the landlord and the
bourgeoisie, new bourgeois elements will continue to emerge. From among
the educated, bourgeois rightists may still emerge. Agents of the
bourgeoisie may even appear inside the Communist Party. Lenin once
pointed out: "To completely eliminate classes, it is necessary not only
to overthrow the exploiter, namely, the landlord and the capitalist, and
to abolish their ownership system, but also to abolish any private
ownership system of the means of production and eliminate disparities
between the urban and rural areas and between physical and
mental labor. This is a task that can only be realized after a long
time." <a id="5">[[5]](#bot_5)</a>

Although some people concede that there are still exploitative classes
in socialist society, they refuse to admit that these classes survive in
socialist production relations. They think that these classes exist only
in that part of society which is divorced from socialist production
relations. The fact is, a society which is divorced from certain
production relations simply does not exist. The exploitative classes do
not live in a vacuum, but in socialist production relations. In other
words, they live in the economy of socialist state enterprises and in
the collective economy. The only difference is that they are no longer
in a dominant position of being the rulers but in that of being ruled.
With the working class and the laboring people, they constitute the
relations of the ruled and the ruling. To think that socialist
production relations do not manifest relations in which the working
class and the laboring people rule and transform the exploitative class
will lead to the harmful conclusion that socialist production relations
are independent of classes. Some people think that since we all earn our
living through labor everyone is the same. Therefore, classes no longer
exist. This erroneous concept is closely related to the theoretical
negation of the class nature of socialist production relations.

According to China's conditions, there exist two exploitative classes
and two laboring classes. The two exploitative classes are the remnants
of the landlord and comprador class and the bourgeoisie and their
affiliated intellectuals. The two laboring classes are the working class
and the collective peasants and their affiliated laboring intellectuals.
The interrelations in socialist production are mainly the relations
among and within these four classes. The relations among these four
classes are not of equal importance. In the whole historical stage of
socialism, the major contradictions are those between the proletariat
and the bourgeoisie. The relations between the dominant proletariat and
the dominated bourgeoisie are the basic class relations in socialist
society. Interpersonal relations in production are
inevitably governed, regulated, and influenced by these relations.
Modern revisionists gloss over this class nature of interpersonal
relations in production. They loudly say that interpersonal relations
are all relations among "comrades, friends, and brothers." The Lin Piao
clique also championed the slogans "while the two struggles turn all
people into enemies, the two peaces turn all people into friends" and
"within the four seas all are brothers." These are absurd. Whoever has
been exposed to Marxism-Leninism knows that no relations among
"comrades, friends, and brothers" are independent of classes in a class
society. The hatred of the proletariat for the bourgeoisie originated in
the exploitation and oppression of the proletariat by the bourgeoisie.
"There can never be love without reasons; nor can there be hatred
without reasons." <a id="6">[[6]](#bot_6)</a>
These two classes can never be "friends," not to mention "brothers." Is
it conceivable that the proletariat and the laboring people will
relinquish their rule and be "brothers" and "friends" of the
bourgeoisie? The intent of the modern revisionists' championing of these
fallacies is to defend the bourgeoisie, deceive the laboring people, and
conceal their conspiracy to transform the socialist interrelations into
capitalist interrelations in order to restore capitalism.
<a id="7">[[7]](#bot_7)</a>

In socialist production, the two exploitative classes have assumed the
status of being ruled. Under the conditions in China, these two classes
are treated differently. The landlord and comprador classes are
classified as enemies, and the national bourgeoisie is classified as of
the people. These two exploitative classes are forced to accept
transformation by different methods, but their relations with the worker
and the peasant are still based on class antagonism. In socialist
production, the laboring people, occupying a dominant position, are the
masters in socialist production relations. Through continuous resolute
and energetic struggle, the working class and the poor and lower-middle
peasants will gradually transform the majority of these two exploitative
classes into self-supporting laborers after a long period of labor.

The working class and the toiling people had the same painful
experience of exploitation and oppression in the old
society. In socialist society, employing the means of production owned
by the state or by the collective ownership of the toiling people, they
all work, though in different roles, for their own class and society.
They shoulder the common burden of reforming the exploiting class and
share the same goal --- to fight for the idea of communism. Therefore,
their basic interests are the same. In socialist production, the
relations among the worker, the peasant, and the laboring intellectuals
and within each of the three groups constitute daily developing
relations among revolutionary comrades based on identical basic
interests. This is a basic point which determines the socialist nature
of the relations among the laboring people.

But is there a "state in which there are no disparities" and no
contradictions of any kind in the relations among the laboring people in
socialist production? No! In the relations among the laboring people in
production, in addition to the basic relationship of being revolutionary
comrades, there is also another aspect involving capitalist traditions
and influences. These capitalist traditions and influences are mainly
reflected in the disparities between the worker and the peasant, the
urban and rural areas, and mental and physical labor. Disparity is
contradiction. This contradiction ultimately possesses the nature of
class contradiction. At the same time, class struggles between the
proletariat and the bourgeoisie are inevitably reflected among the
laboring people, so that all issues of right and wrong, revolutionary
and conservative, advanced and backward are stamped with a class mark.
Therefore, contradictions among the people ultimately reflect the
contradictions and struggles between the proletariat and the
bourgeoisie, between the socialist road and the capitalist road.

### _The Immensely Active Role of Interrelations_

Certain interrelations are based on a corresponding ownership system of
the means of production. But the interrelations also play an immensely
active role with respect to two other aspects of production
relations, namely, the form of the ownership system of the means of
production and its corresponding distributive relations.

The function of interrelations with respect to the two other aspects of
production relations was very apparent in the historical period before
the emergence of socialist society. For example, in order to establish
and consolidate the capitalist ownership system and its distributive
relations, the bourgeoisie had to establish interpersonal relations
based on capitalist principles, namely, relations in which the
bourgeoisie ruled the worker. As Marx solemnly pointed out in his
criticism of the reactionary arguments that "exploitation is justified"
and "oppression is justified" which were championed by the defenders of
the American slave system, "With this relationship of domination and
enslavement as a precondition, he \[the capitalist\] will force the wage
laborer to produce both his own wages and also a wage for the supervisor
to compensate the supervisor for his labor of dominating and supervising
the laborer." <a id="8">[[8]](#bot_8)</a> If
the capitalist and his agents did not wield absolute dominating power
over the worker and if they could not force the worker to work according
to the will of the capitalist, then capitalist exploitation would not be
realized and the capitalist ownership system and the capitalist
distributive relations in which "the laborer does not reap and the
reaper does not labor" could never be consolidated and developed.
Therefore, the bourgeoisie pays a great deal of attention to the
establishment and consolidation of the subordinate status of the worker
to capital in order to consolidate and develop the capitalist ownership
system and distributive relations.

In socialist society, the transformation of interrelations is also an
important link in the transformation of production relations. When this
link is grasped and continually improved, it has great significance for
consolidating and perfecting the socialist ownership system and the
socialist distributive relations and consequently for promoting the
development of social productive forces.

The socialist construction in our country demonstrated that
when the exploiting classes' frantic attack on our
socialist enterprises had been repulsed, when our contradictions with
our enemies had been correctly handled, when we had gradually
established, according to socialist principles, the relations among the
working people, between the leader and the masses, among the
administrators, technicians, and workers, and between the laborers and
the peasants, we were able to fully develop their activism and
creativity and to orient the direction of our socialist enterprises. We
saw our socialist revolution and socialist production thrive, our system
of socialization of the means of production strengthen, and our
distributive relations incessantly improve. When socialist interpersonal
relations are contradicted or even sabotaged and when the remnants of
capitalist interpersonal relations are allowed to develop, the position
of the masses as masters will be threatened, the socialist activism of
the masses will be suppressed and inhibited, and consequently, the
socialist ownership system and distributive relations will also be
inhibited or may even degenerate.

Interrelations gradually established on the basis of a public ownership
system of the means of production and according to socialist principles
are not confined to one enterprise. They involve all enterprises, all
economic departments, the state ownership system, and the collective
ownership system. They are manifested in exchange activities such as
production cooperation and exchanges of advanced experience and advanced
technology. The development of such mutual exchanges in production, with
leadership and planning among enterprises and among departments,
embodies the superiority of the socialist public ownership system. They
are conducive to the consolidation and development of the socialist
ownership system, favorable to fully mobilizing the forces of various
economic departments, and favorable to fully tapping economic potentials
and promoting rapid development of the whole social productive force.

The importance of the gradual perfection of interrelations with respect
to consolidating production relations and developing the social
productive forces deserves our full attention. After the
establishment of the socialist public ownership system, the issue of
interrelations must be continually and seriously resolved.

[Consolidate and Develop Socialist Interrelations in the Course of Struggle](#)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _Develop Relations of Mutual Support and Mutual Promotion between Industry and Agriculture_

From the angle of the whole of social production rather than that of a
particular enterprise, interrelations are primarily manifested as
relations between industry and agriculture. Industry and agriculture are
the two basic material production sectors. The socialist state ownership
system which is dominant in the industrial sector and the socialist
collective ownership system of the laboring masses which is dominant in
agriculture are two forms of the socialist ownership system. From the
standpoint of class relations, this economic structure is a relationship
between the worker and the peasant. This class relationship is
fundamentally different from the relationship between the laboring class
and the exploitative class; it is the relation of a worker-peasant
alliance in which basic interests are identical and leadership is in the
hands of the working class.

After the basic victory had been won in the ownership system of the
means of production in China's socialist revolution, Chairman Mao
pointed out: "Interrelations in production and exchange among various
economic sectors are gradually being established according to socialist
principles. More suitable forms are gradually being sought."
<a id="9">[[9]](#bot_9)</a>
Interrelations among various economic sectors are primarily
interrelations between industry and agriculture and, consequently,
interrelations between the worker and the peasant. The worker and the
peasant are both masters of the means of production. The worker labors
in enterprises under the state ownership system. The peasant labors in
enterprises under the collective ownership system. The worker and the
peasant must trade with each other so that social production can be
carried on.

In socialist society, the worker and the peasant are both industrial
forces in socialist construction. Their relationship as revolutionary
comrades in production is a daily developing one of mutual support and
mutual promotion based on the socialist public ownership system. In the
production and exchange processes, the worker produces various
agricultural machines, chemical fertilizers, insecticides, and
industrial products for daily use in the countryside in support of the
development of agricultural production and the improvement of the
livelihood of the peasant. The peasant produces food grain, raw
materials, and various agricultural and sideline products. Furthermore,
in accordance with the growth rate of labor productivity in agriculture,
he supplies an appropriate amount of labor power in support of the
development of industrial production and satisfies the industrial
production and livelihood needs of the urban population. Under the
leadership of the working class, mutual support and mutual promotion
between the worker and the peasant are in line with the basic interests
of these two classes and constitute a strong force for consolidating the
worker-peasant alliance and promoting socialist economic development.

In addition to direct contribution to the financial accumulation of the
state through taxation, the exchange activities between the worker and
the peasant under the two kinds of socialist ownership system are
primarily in the form of commodity exchanges of industrial and
agricultural products. Therefore, there may also arise some
contradictions based on identical basic interests on matters relating to
quantity, variety, quality, and price of industrial and agricultural
products, as well as the proportions of marketed and retained
agricultural products and tax burdens on the peasant.

The worker-peasant alliance in socialist society is the basis of
proletarian dictatorship. Under the leadership of the working class, it
is an important task to correctly handle contradictions between the
worker and the peasant based on common interests and to develop the
socialist relations of mutual support and mutual promotion between
industry and agriculture.

The relations between industry and agriculture in socialist
production are controlled, restricted, and affected by the major
contradictions between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. The working
class (through the Communist Party) must lead the peasant to establish,
consolidate, and develop a socialist collective economy and gradually
realize agricultural mechanization on the basis of agricultural
collectivization so that socialist agriculture will advance along the
socialist road, its relations to socialist state industry will be
steadily strengthened, and the economic basis of proletarian
dictatorship in agriculture will be consolidated. The bourgeoisie always
tries hard to induce the peasant to take the capitalist road and
attempts to undermine the socialist collective economy by exploiting the
serious spontaneous capitalist tendency of a few rich middle peasants.
Therefore, the process for developing the worker-peasant relations in
socialist production must of necessity be a process of struggle for the
peasant between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. Because of this, we
would commit a gross blunder if, in handling the relations between
agriculture and industry and the relations between the exchange of
agricultural and industrial products, we saw only the relations between
products but not the relations between the worker and the peasant or the
relations between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie in their struggle
to win over the peasant.

### _Extend the "Lung-chiang Style,"<a id="s_a_2">[\*](#bot_s_a_2)</a> Develop Relations of Socialist Cooperation_

Another important aspect of interpersonal relations in socialist
production is the relations among enterprises, among sectors, and among
regions. It is mainly manifested in relations of socialist cooperation
among these enterprises, sectors, and regions.

Marx said: "Many people are systematically engaged in cooperative labor
in the production process or in different, but related, production
processes. This form of labor is called
cooperation."<a id="10">[[10]](#bot_10)</a>
This cooperation has different social characters and different ranges of
activity under different production relations.

The private ownership of the means of production by the capitalist
confines cooperation in capitalist production to one enterprise or one
monopoly capital group. From the viewpoint of the whole capitalist
society, systematic cooperation among various production sectors and
various enterprises divided by the private ownership system is
impossible to establish. Even certain cooperation relations established
through contracts are extremely unstable and are often interrupted.

Socialist cooperation based on a public ownership system of the means of
production can be developed not only within one enterprise; it can also
be conducted in a planned and organized manner over the whole society
among different enterprises, sectors, and regions. "When one plant
participates, a hundred plants cooperate. When each plant makes one, a
hundred plants make a line." Socialist cooperation creates a new
productive force. It is favorable to the development of one speciality
and many abilities in enterprises, further contributing to increasing
labor productivity. It is conducive to concentrating manpower, material
resources, and finances to complete production and construction projects
which one enterprise, one sector, or one region could not complete
alone. It is favorable to concentrating strength for a short period to
overcome weak links in the development of the national economy, thus
promoting rapid development of the whole national economy.

The development of socialist cooperation is an important form for
continually improving the interrelations among enterprises, among
sectors, and among regions. There are no basic conflicts of interest
among the constituent parts of the socialist economy. Socialist
cooperation requires having the implementation of proletarian politics
in command, the breaking down of the boundaries among enterprises, among
sectors, and among regions, concern for the whole situation, growth
through difficulties, and consideration for other people. It also
requires a strict adherence to supply contracts, coordination between
the cooperative assignment and the completion of plans, and adoption
of effective measures to guarantee the completion of
assignments according to variety, specifications, quality, quantity, and
schedule. These cooperative relations are fundamentally opposed to the
capitalist interrelations based on mutual deception and competition and
on capitalist departmentalism. Departmentalism is a conceptual
reflection of the private ownership system and will exist in socialist
society for a long time to come in varying degrees. "Paying no attention
to the overall situation and being indifferent to other sectors, other
regions, and other people is the characteristic of this
departmentalism."
<a id="11">[[11]](#bot_11)</a> The following
erroneous concepts and actions still exist in cooperative relations:
Preferring to play a major role rather than a minor one; reckoning
economic accounts at the expense of political accounts; paying attention
only to partial interests and not to overall interests, even to the
extent of benefiting oneself at the expense of others; disregarding the
state's unified economic plan by cutting corners or, so to speak,
entering through the backdoor; and so forth. The appearance of these
problems in the process of cooperation is a reflection of the struggles
between the two classes, the two roads, and the two lines. The
development process of socialist cooperation is a process of struggle
with bourgeois influences, especially bourgeois departmentalism. This is
essentially a reflection of the struggle between the socialist public
ownership system and the capitalist private ownership system.

The unfolding of socialist cooperation requires an extension of the
communist work style, a firm adherence to socialist principles, a
voluntary observance of state fiscal policies, and the resolute
implementation of various proletarian economic policies. Therefore, in
the cooperative relations between the state enterprises and the
collective enterprises, among state enterprises, among collective
enterprises, among sectors, and among regions, the principle of
equivalent exchange must be observed, and fair pricing enforced. Mutual
support in material resources in the cooperative process must be in
accordance with the state plan and have the approval of the leading
organ. It is not permissible to indiscriminately engage in "mutual
exchanges" in the name of "cooperation," disrupting the
socialist plan.

With the victorious development of socialist cooperation, the laboring
people will continually strengthen the proletarian viewpoint of seeing
the whole situation and will continually criticize and repudiate
bourgeois departmentalism. In the process of struggle, the laboring
people's relations of being revolutionary comrades will steadily
develop.

### _The "Anshan Steel Constitution" Is a Compass for Handling Interrelations within Enterprises_

The socialist enterprises (including industry, agriculture,
communications and transportation, commerce, and all production and
circulation departments) are the basic unit of human material production
and exchange. Interpersonal relations in production exist in enterprises
in large numbers. Interrelations among the laboring people are chiefly
of two kinds: The relations between the leadership and the masses and
the relations between the management personnel and technicians (mental
laborers) on the one hand and the worker and the peasant (physical
laborers) on the other. The correct handling of these two aspects of
these relations, that is, to "create a political situation in which
there is centralism as well as democracy, discipline as well as freedom,
unified determination as well as individual happiness and vitality"
<a id="12">[[12]](#bot_12)</a>, is an important
issue in consolidating and developing socialist production relations and
in improving socialist enterprise management. In enterprises, there are
also the relations between the worker-peasant laboring people and the
two exploitative classes. These relations have been analyzed above.

The socialist enterprise is an enterprise of the working class and the
laboring people. The working class and the laboring people are
responsible for leading the enterprise through their representatives.
This gives rise to an issue of the relations between the leadership and
the masses. Although the leadership personnel and the masses in the
enterprise hold different jobs in revolution, they are
"comrades-in-arms in the same trench" who share the heavy duty of
properly managing the enterprise and who labor for a common
revolutionary goal. Workers on the Shanghai wharfs put it nicely,
"Though jobs are different in revolution, our thinking must be in
unison." These words pointed out the key to improving the relations
between the leadership and the masses in the socialist enterprises.

In enterprises, it is also necessary to have some people in charge of
various management and technical jobs. This gives rise to the issue of
the relations between the management personnel and technicians and the
worker-peasant laboring masses. There are two categories of China's
management personnel and technicians. One consists of management
personnel and technicians left over from the old society. With the
exception of a few reactionaries who are hostile to socialist society,
the great majority of them love their country, love our People's
Republic, and are willing to serve the people and the socialist state.
Another category consists of those intellectuals trained by the
proletariat through struggle and through the development of socialist
revolution and socialist construction. Though some of them may have been
poisoned by the revisionist line in education and their world outlook
must still be continually transformed, the great majority are willing to
integrate with the worker-peasant masses and make contributions to the
socialist and communist enterprise. Therefore, in socialist society, the
relations between the leadership and the masses, between the management
personnel and technicians and the worker-peasant masses are also daily
developing relations of being revolutionary comrades and sharing common
interests. But contradictions do exist between them; it is not an
"undiversified situation."

The division of labor in socialist enterprises between the leadership
and the masses, between the management personnel and technicians and the
direct producers still reflects the division of labor of the old society
and is a manifestation of the still existing disparity between mental
and physical labor. Under these conditions, if the leadership personnel,
management personnel, and technicians who are responsible for organizing
and guiding production do not regularly participate in
collective production labor, they become divorced from the laboring
masses and subject to the corrosion of bourgeois thinking and develop
contradictions with the laboring masses. These contradictions often
reflect to varying degrees the contradictions between the proletariat
and the bourgeoisie. For example, some leadership cadres, management
personnel, and technicians who have been poisoned by such Confucian and
Mencian thinking as "those who use their brains rule, those who use
their muscles are ruled" do not treat the masses and themselves with the
correct attitude. They think that "the leadership is brighter" and do
not treat the worker-peasant masses as masters of the enterprise. They
resort to restrictive measures and convert the revolutionary comrade
relationship into relations of domination and subordination. These are
all manifestations of the lingering poison of the revisionist line and
reflect to varying degrees the contradictions and struggles between the
bourgeoisie and the proletariat. At the same time, though there are no
basic conflicts of interest among the masses, some people may also not
handle interpersonal relations according to socialist principles because
of the influence of bourgeois thinking and the relaxation of socialist
education by the leadership. These contradictions among the people in
the enterprise embody to varying degrees the nature of class
contradictions. Although these contradictions exist, from the standpoint
of all the interrelations among the people in the enterprise, this
interrelation is still socialist in nature as long as the proletariat
assumes the leading position. If these contradictions were allowed to
develop and the bourgeois versions were allowed to assume the guiding
position, then socialist interrelations would degenerate into capitalist
interrelations.

The "Anshan Steel Constitution," personally announced by Chairman Mao,
and his series of instructions such as "Management Is Also Socialist
Education"
<a id="13">[[13]](#bot_13)</a>
constitute the compass for the correct handling of interpersonal
relations in socialist enterprises. The basic spiritofthe "Anshan Steel
Constitution" is to firmly practice putting proletarian politics in
command, strengthen Party leadership, launch mass movements in a big
way, implement "two participations, one reform, and three combinations"
(namely, insist on having cadres participate in labor and masses
participate in management, revise irrational regulations and systems,
and implement the three combinations among the worker, the cadre, and
the technician), and make technical innovations and technical revolution
in a big way. Firm adherence to putting proletarian politics in command
and stronger Party leadership are basic principles for the correct
handling of interrelations. Under the guidance of these principles, the
serious and thorough implementation of the "two participations, one
reform, and three combinations" will enable the relationship of being
revolutionary comrades to develop steadily between the leadership and
the masses and between the management personnel and technicians and the
worker-peasant laboring masses.

The participation of cadres in production labor is a big event of
fundamental importance under the socialist system. It is also an
important aspect in properly handling socialist interrelations. Chairman
Mao pointed out: "We must insist on the system of cadres participating
in collective production labor. The cadres of our Party and our state
are ordinary laborers and not masters riding on the shoulders of the
people. Through participating in collective production labor, the cadre
keeps the broadest, most regular, and closest contact with the laboring
people. This is a big event of fundamental importance under the
socialist system. It is instrumental in overcoming bureaucratism and
preventing revisionism and dogmatism."
<a id="14">[[14]](#bot_14)</a>
This is an infallible truth explained by Chairman Mao after summing up
the experience and lessons of the international communist movement.
Those cadres who can voluntarily and regularly participate in collective
production labor are generally more conscious in their resistance to
bourgeois thinking and possess more self-knowledge. They show concern
and affection for the masses, humbly listen to the call of the masses,
are receptive to criticism and supervision from the masses, and can
firmly adhere to the socialist direction of the enterprise. They are
more familiar with production conditions and seldom give blind commands.
There is one song among women textile workers which describes the
transformation of a leadership cadre of a factory after her
participation in collective production labor: "In the past, she never
visited the workshop; now she comes to the side of the machine to ask
for advice. In the past, things were delayed; now they are solved
immediately. In the past, only big reports were made; now she says what
she thinks in the workshop. In the past, she was called a petty
bureaucrat; now she is treated like a sister." The fact is such
leadership personnel, management personnel, and technicians are welcomed
by the masses. Even if there are contradictions between them, they can
be correctly resolved in good time.

The participation of the masses in management is a requirement of their
position as masters in socialist production. Only by insisting on having
the masses participate in management can the position of the laboring
masses as masters in the enterprises be defended and consolidated. The
exploitative class always opposes having the masses participate in
management. When the persons in power taking the capitalist road
controlled the leadership of the enterprises, they relied on a few
bourgeois experts. They resorted to restrictive measures in dealing with
the worker-peasant masses. This effectively expropriated the right of
the masses to manage the enterprise. Under these conditions, the
relations between the capitalist-roaders and the worker-peasant masses
was nothing but capitalist domination and subordination in disguise.
When people with a firm commitment to bourgeois thinking control the
leadership of the enterprises, it is also impossible for the masses
really to participate in enterprise management. In effect, it is up to a
few cadres to do what they want. Therefore, in these enterprises, the
socialist interrelations between the leadership and the masses are not
perfect. In the process of China's socialist revolution and socialist
construction, especially in the process of the Great Proletarian
Cultural Revolution and the Campaign to Criticize Lin Piao and Rectify
the Style of Work, the power stolen by the capitalist-roaders and bad
people has been taken back, the bourgeoisie and
revisionists have been criticized and repudiated, and the leadership of
the enterprises has been gradually and effectively put into the hands of
the Marxists and the laboring people. A new situation of having the
masses participate in management has subsequently arisen.

Participation of the masses in management primarily refers to the
participation of the direct producers, the worker-peasant masses, in
management. The masses who participate in enterprise management must not
only direct production, technical know-how, and accounting, but more
importantly, they have to help and supervise the cadres in thoroughly
implementing the Party line and general and specific policies. In the
Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution, the representatives of the
worker-peasant masses directly participated in the enterprises'
revolutionary committees. They were not divorced from production, but
they still performed their supervisory work. This is a new development
in the masses' participation in management. This is extremely important
for achieving close relations between the cadres and the masses,
promoting firm adherence to the mass line by the enterprise leadership,
serving the people, and perfecting and developing socialist
interrelations.

The implementation of the "three combinations" of the masses, the
cadres, and the technicians in the production struggle and scientific
experiments in order to solve major technical problems of production is
not only conducive to stimulating technical innovation on a mass basis,
but also to accustoming the intellectuals to labor and the
worker-peasant masses to systematic knowledge, narrowing the essential
distinctions between mental and physical labor, and further perfecting
and developing socialist interrelations.

The reform of irrational regulations and systems in enterprise
management is another aspect of continually adjusting and transforming
socialist interrelations. Any social production requires certain
regulations and systems. But the type of regulations and systems
instituted is determined by the production relations in society. Lenin
sharply pointed this out with respect to enterprise management in
capitalist society: "What concerns the capitalist is how to
plunder through management and how to manage through plundering."
<a id="15">[[15]](#bot_15)</a> The regulations
and systems of capitalist enterprise aim at one thing only, that is, how
to better restrict the freedom of the worker and how to extract more
surplus value from the worker. The numerous regulations and endless
rules in capitalist enterprise are all designed to defend, and are
restricted by, capitalist production relations. Under socialism,
"systems have to be favorable to the masses."
<a id="16">[[16]](#bot_16)</a> This is the most
fundamental difference between socialist regulations and systems and
capitalist regulations and systems. Systems having to be favorable to
the masses means that such systems have to be favorable to the masses'
role as masters, to the improvement and development of interpersonal
relations in the enterprise, to the exercise of socialist activism by
the masses, and to the development of the Three Revolutionary Movements
of class struggle, production struggle, and scientific experiment.
Regulations and systems which are favorable to the masses will certainly
be favorable to the development of production as they mobilize the
activism Of the masses. Under the influence of the revisionist line of
Liu Shao-ch'i and Lin Piao, the regulations and systems of some
enterprises often restricted the masses. The worker's criticism was that
"there are too many systems and regulations and they are created either
for the purpose of punishment or coercion." Under good leadership, the
masses should be mobilized to revise, phase by phase, the systems and
regulations which are irrational, restrictive, detrimental to
production, creating disharmony, and alienating workers. Meanwhile, on
the basis of the experience acquired in practice, a new set of healthy
and rational systems and regulations which correspond to the need for
socialist interrelations and the development of the productive forces
should be established.

[The Immense Influence of the Superstructure on the Formation of Interrelations](#)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

People's status and the nature of their interrelations in production are
determined by the system of ownership of the means of
production. But they also form and develop in reaction to the
superstructure. Without some influence from the superstructure, people's
status in production and their interrelations cannot be smoothly formed
and will not have a chance to consolidate and develop. The ruling class
of any society always uses the power of the superstructure to defend by
all means the ownership system that has been established and to
consolidate and develop the people's status, their interrelations in
production, and the corresponding distributive relations. This is a
general law.

Take the capitalist society for example. The bourgeoisie of any country
uses the power of the superstructure to establish and extend the
capital-labor relationship by force to dominate labor. Marx pointed out
that to establish and extend the domination of capital over labor, the
newly emerging bourgeoisie "needs to exercise the power of the state."
<a id="17">[[17]](#bot_17)</a> From the end of
the fifteenth century to the first half of the nineteenth century, the
well-known "enclosure movement"
<a id="18">[[18]](#bot_18)</a> in England
resorted to violent measures to evict a large number of poor peas ants
who then drifted into the urban areas destitute and "free as a bird"
only to become objects of domination by capital. However, the peasants
who drifted into the urban areas often preferred to become tramps rather
than be subject to the arbitrary rule of capital over labor. To force
the destitute peasants into the factory, the British bourgeoisie passed
laws to punish tramps in order to "force them to become accustomed to
the necessary discipline of wage labor by means of flogging, branding,
and torture." <a id="19">[[19]](#bot_19)</a>
Look how cruel were the means used by the bourgeoisie to establish and
develop interrelations in which capital dominated labor.

The relationship of capital dominating labor was established by
violence. It could only be crushed by force. In socialist countries
under proletarian dictatorship, this relation was in fact crushed.

Because socialist production relations can only be established un der
proletarian dictatorship, the effect of the socialist superstructure on
the socialist economic substructure is especially apparent.
Socialist interrelations are determined by the socialist
public ownership system. They are also formed and developed under the
immense pressure of the socialist superstructure. If we thought that
socialist interrelations would automatically form and develop with the
establishment of the socialist public ownership system, we would be
seriously mistaken.

In socialist interrelations, the relationship of the working class and
other laboring people vis-a-vis the bourgeoisie and other exploiting
classes is one between the ruler and the ruled and between the
transformer and the transformed. Because of their class nature, the
exploiters will not voluntarily accept the position of being ruled and
transformed. The fact that the proletariat is capable of coercing some
of them to accept socialist transformation is due to the powerful state
machinery it controls. Without this precondition, the rule over, and the
transformation of, the bourgeoisie are impossible.

Among the laboring people, if the relationship of being revolutionary
comrades is to develop steadily according to socialist principles, it is
necessary to rely on the role of the socialist superstructure to educate
and transform ourselves in order to free ourselves from the influence of
reactionaries at home and abroad. Chairman Mao pointed out: "The
people's state defends the people. Only with the people's state is it
possible to educate and transform ourselves through democratic means
throughout the whole country and on a total scale in order to free
ourselves from the influence of internal and external reactionaries."
<a id="20">[[20]](#bot_20)</a> Only by
insisting on waging socialist revolution in the superstructure, using
the proletarian ideology to gradually overcome the bourgeois ideology,
and continually expelling the capitalist traditions and influences in
interrelations can the relation among the laboring people of being
revolutionary comrades steadily develop, and only thus is the way
cleared for the formation and development of the interrelations of
socialist production.

To sum up, the process of formation and development of socialist
interrelations is a long process of political and ideological struggle
between the two classes. To defend and develop socialist
interrelations, the proletariat must firmly adhere to the basic Party
line for the whole historical stage of socialism. After a basic victory
has been won in the socialist revolution of the system of ownership of
the means of production, it must continue to penetratingly carry on
socialist revolution in the political and ideological lines, liquidate
bourgeois ideology and foster proletarian ideology, fight selfishness,
and criticize revisionism. This is a fundamental issue in the
consolidation and improvement of socialist interrelations. If we thought
that after the establishment of the socialist public ownership system
the exploitative class vanishes and if we departed from the central
issue of the proletariat's opposition to the bourgeoisie in explaining
socialist interrelations, then we would be in opposition to the basic
Party line and would fall into the trap of the class extinction
argument. If we did not insist on carrying on socialist revolution in
the superstructure and allowed the free overflow of bourgeois ideology,
then socialist interrelations would degenerate into capitalist
interrelations, and the socialist public ownership system would
disintegrate. The restoration of capitalism in the Soviet Union teaches
us by way of negative example to understand the scientific truth of
Marxism in this regard.

### _Major Study References_

Chairman Mao, "On the Correct Handling of Contradictions among the
People."

Chairman Mao, "A Talk at the National Propaganda Work Conference of the
Chinese Communist Party."

### _Review Problems_

1\. Why do we say that the interpersonal relations in socialist
production are ultimately class relations?

2\. What is the significance of the interpersonal relations in production
established according to socialist principles in consolidating,
perfecting, and developing the socialist public ownership
system and distributive relations and in promoting the
development of the productive forces?

3\. Where is the immensely active role of the superstructure in the
consolidation, perfection, and continual development of the
interpersonal relations in socialist production manifested?

[Notes]
-------------------

<a id="bot_s_a">[\*](#s_a)</a> An-chao she-hui-chu-i yuan-tse chien-li
jen-men ti hsianghu kuan-hsi --- jen-men tsai she-hui-chu-i sheng-ch'an
chung ti ti-wei ho hsiang-hu kuan-hsi.

<a id="bot_s_a_2">[\*](#s_a_2)</a> Lung-chiang is a model brigade somewhere in
Fukien. The story of its battle with floods by collective efforts was
made a theme by Chiang Ch'ing in her model revolutionary opera entitled
"Song of Lung-chiang." --- Editor.

<a id="bot_1">[[1]](#1)</a> "Three Sources and Components of Marxism,"
_Selected Works of Lenin_, Vol. 2, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she,
1972, p. 444.

<a id="bot_2">[[2]](#2)</a> Engels, "Karl Marx 'A Critique of Political
Economy,' "_Selected Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 2,
Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, p. 123.

<a id="bot_3">[[3]](#3)</a> "A Talk at the National Propaganda Work
Conference of the Chinese Communist Party," _Selected Readings from the
Works of Mao Tse-tung_, (Type A), Jen-min ch'u-pan-she,
1965, p. 365.

<a id="bot_4">[[4]](#4)</a> Ibid., p. 365.

<a id="bot_5">[[5]](#5)</a> "The Great Innovation," _Selected Works of
Lenin_, Vol. 4, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 11.

<a id="bot_6">[[6]](#6)</a> "Talks at the Yenan Forum on Literature and
Art," _Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung_, Vol. 3, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 827.

<a id="bot_7">[[7]](#7)</a> Many contemporary Soviet
revisionist writers reveal the nature of the "comrades, friends, and
brothers" relationship championed by Soviet revisionism. In a play
entitled "The Outsider" by a Soviet writer, I Te-wu-lieh-tzu-chi, the
major character Ch'ieh-shih-k'o-fu, a Soviet revisionist Party member
and an engineer of a certain enterprise, went to the No. 26 Foundry of
the Nieh-lieh-shih Company to transform its "backward appearance." He
arrogantly roared to the workers: "We are the leaders. Our hands do not
do anything. We work with words and our brains." He ordered the foremen
to keep a close watch on the workers to "keep an eye on them and get at
their throats." Whoever disobeys an order should be punished by
"deducting half of his bonus." "Hit them with rubles." In the Soviet
Union, the laboring people are subject to cruel exploitation and
oppression from such new bureaucratic monopolist bourgeoisie. This is
the nature of the "comrades, friends, and brothers" relationship
championed by Soviet revisionism.

<a id="bot_8">[[8]](#8)</a> Marx, _Capital_, Vol. 3,
Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1966, p. 440.

<a id="bot_9">[[9]](#9)</a> "On the Correct Handling of Contradictions
among the People," _Selected Readings from the Works of Mao
Tse-tung_, (Type A), Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1965, p. 337.

<a id="bot_10">[[10]](#10)</a> Marx, _Capital_, Vol. 1,
_Complete Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 23, p. 362.

<a id="bot_11">[[11]](#11)</a> "The Rectification of the Party's Style of
Work," _Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung_, Vol. 3, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she 1968, p. 782.

<a id="bot_12">[[12]](#12)</a> Quotations from Chairman Mao. Taken from
_Hung-ch'i_ \_(Red Flag)\_, 1972, No. 10.

<a id="bot_13">[[13]](#13)</a> Quoted from _Jen-min jih-pao_
\_(People's Daily)\_, August 14, 1972.

<a id="bot_14">[[14]](#14)</a> Quoted from "On Khrushchev's Fake
Communism and Its Lesson for World History," Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1964,
pp. 54-55.

<a id="bot_15">[[15]](#15)</a> "How to Organize Competition?" _Selected
Works of Lenin_, Vol. 3, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 395.

<a id="bot_16">[[16]](#16)</a> Quotations from Chairman Mao. Taken from
_Jen-min jih-pao_ \_(People's Daily)\_, May 31, 1972.

<a id="bot_17">[[17]](#17)</a> Marx, _Capital_, Vol. 1,
_Complete Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 23, p. 806.

<a id="bot_18">[[18]](#18)</a> The "enclosure movement" was
one of the important forms of primitive capitalist accumulation. The
"enclosure movement" in England from the end of the fifteenth century
was the most typical. At the end of the fifteenth century, the emergence
of England's wool-spinning industry led to a continuous rise in wool
prices. Sheep farming became a very profitable business. The landed
aristocracy and the bourgeoisie of England colluded to forcibly evict
the peasant from the land and then enclosed it to raise sheep. Houses
within the enclosure were totally destroyed. The peasants were rendered
homeless and reduced to being beggars and tramps. In the eighteenth
century, the British bourgeois government, by means of a series of
"enclosure acts" concocted by the Parliament, supported the violent
plundering of the peasant by the bourgeoisie. In this process, the
peasant continually resisted and started many rebellions against the
enclosure movement.

<a id="bot_19">[[19]](#19)</a> Marx, _Capital_, Vol. 1,
_Complete Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 23, p. 805.

<a id="bot_20">[[20]](#20)</a> "On the People's Democratic Dictatorship,"
_Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung_, Vol. 4, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 1365.
