[*17* We Must Rely on Agriculture as the Foundation and Industry as the Leading Factor in Developing the National Economy](#) 
================================================================================================================================================================

[The Relations among Socialist Agriculture, Light Industry, and Heavy
Industry](#)<a id="s_a">[\*](#bot_s_a)</a>

Agriculture and light and heavy industry are the three major material
production sectors in the socialist national economy. To understand
correctly the importance and role of these sectors in the national
economy and to handle correctly their relations are instrumental in
consolidating and developing the worker-peasant alliance and promoting
rapid and planned development of the socialist national economy.

[Agriculture Is the Foundation of the National Economy](#)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _We Must Rely on Agriculture as the Foundation in Developing the National Economy_

To live, to produce, and to engage in cultural and social activities,
people must first solve the problem of eating. Agricultural
production is a precondition for the survival of the human
race and all production activities. Agriculture (including gathering,
planting, hunting, fishing, and animal husbandry) was the only
production sector in the early period of human society. At that time,
because labor productivity was very low, the whole labor power of the
primitive society had to participate in agricultural labor to keep the
commune members alive. Only when labor productivity in agriculture was
raised such that a portion of the labor force could grow sufficient
agricultural products to support all the members of society could labor
be spared to engage in other activities. Thus, the handicraft industry
was separated from the agricultural sector to become an independent
production sector, the other new sector --- commerce --- appeared, and
sectors that were concerned with spiritual production such as culture
and education also emerged. The higher the labor productivity was in
agriculture, the more developed were the sectors outside of agriculture
that were concerned with material and spiritual production. Marx
observed, "The shorter the time required by society to produce wheat and
livestock, the longer is the time available for other production ---
material and spiritual production."
<a id="1">[[1]](#bot_1)</a> He continued,
"Agricultural labor productivity beyond what is required for the
personal needs of the laborer is the basis of all societies."
<a id="2">[[2]](#bot_2)</a> Therefore, in
essence, agriculture is the basis of human survival and the basis for
the independence and further development of the other sectors of the
national economy. This is an economic law applicable to all historical
periods in human society.

The role of agriculture as the foundation in the national economy is
especially pronounced in socialist society as compared with any past
society. In capitalist society, the objective law of agriculture as the
foundation of the national economy plays its role under competition and
chaotic production. Some imperialist countries whose domestic
agriculture was underdeveloped plundered their colonies and semicolonies
for agricultural products by paying low prices to satisfy the
development needs of monopoly capital. In those countries, it was not
domestic agriculture, but foreign agriculture, that served as a
foundation of the national economy. In socialist society,
it is not permissible to plunder the agriculture of backward countries.
Even if exchanges are made according to equal values, it is still not
permissible to rely on foreign countries for food or to develop the
socialist economy on the basis of foreign agriculture. To do so •would
be contrary to the principles of independence and selfreliance. In
organizing the development of the national economy, the socialist
country must consciously apply the objective law of agriculture as the
foundation of the national economy.

In concrete terms, the primary reason that the development of the
socialist national economy must rely on agriculture as the foundation is
that the development of the various departments of the socialist economy
depends on agriculture to provide the means of subsistence. Regardless
of the enterprise, be it industry, transportation, or education, it
always boils down to the prerequisite that agriculture has to provide a
certain amount of commodities and grain.

Another reason that agriculture is the foundation for developing the
socialist national economy is that it is the source of industrial raw
materials, with the exception of a portion of the supply which comes
from industry itself. Raw materials for light industry in particular are
essentially provided by agriculture. At present, approximately 70
percent of the raw materials for our light industry is provided by
agriculture. Heavy industry also needs certain agricultural products as
inputs. If agriculture could not increase its supply of raw materials,
industrial development would be gravely affected. Chairman Mao pointed
out: "Light industry and agriculture are closely related. There will be
no light industry without agriculture."
<a id="3">[[3]](#bot_3)</a> Agriculture is
directly related to industrial development, particularly to light
industry.

Another reason why agriculture is the foundation for developing the
socialist national economy is that the rural areas constitute a vast
market for industrial products. The rural population, accounting for
approximately 80 percent of the total, forms a major market for
industry. The more developed agricultural production is, the more
commodity grains and industrial raw materials will be
produced, and the higher the peasants' purchasing power will be. The
peasants' need for both light and heavy industrial products continuously
grows. Soon after the victorious implementation of China's
cooperativization, Chairman Mao observed: "At present, people have not
yet clearly realized the point that heavy industry must take agriculture
as its primary market. With the steady advancement of agricultural
technology and its ever-increasing modernization, such that more and
more machinery, fertilizers, water conservancy, and power and
transportation facilities will be available for agriculture and more
fuels and construction materials will be available to private
consumption, then people will comprehend that agriculture is the primary
market for heavy industry."
<a id="4">[[4]](#bot_4)</a>

Another reason why agriculture must be relied on as the foundation in
developing the socialist national economy is that agriculture is the
reservoir of labor power for industry and other sectors of the national
economy. To develop socialist industry, commerce, and transportation,
additional labor is required. In addition to trying hard to raise labor
productivity in these sectors in order to use the labor force thus saved
for new needs, additional labor comes partly from the urban areas and
partly from the rural areas. Chairman Mao pointed out, "The peasant is
the predecessor of the Chinese worker."
<a id="5">[[5]](#bot_5)</a> However, how much
of the rural population can be transferred as labor force to support the
development needs of other sectors of the national economy is not
determined by these development needs, but by the level of development
of agricultural production and by how much agricultural labor
productivity can be increased. Only under the conditions that
agricultural labor productivity is continuously being raised and the
output of agricultural and sideline products is continuously increasing
is it possible to transfer an appropriate amount of labor force to
support the development of other sectors of the national economy.

Another reason why agriculture must be relied on as the foundation in
developing the socialist national economy is that agriculture is an
important source of state capital accumulation. In addition to directly
providing the state with capital accumulation through
agricultural taxes, it indirectly provides capital accumulation to the
state by supplying agricultural products to light industry as raw
materials. Therefore, the development of agriculture also assumes
significance in increasing the state revenue, expanding capital
accumulation, and supporting socialist construction.

Viewed from the above several aspects, the importance and role of
agriculture in the national economy determine that the development of
the national economy cannot be separated from the development of
agriculture. If agriculture is not properly developed, other sectors of
the national economy will not prosper either. The experience of China's
socialist construction has demonstrated that if there is a bumper
harvest in a particular year, the development of the national economy
will accelerate in the same year or in the following one. Conversely, if
there is a lean year, the development of the national economy will slow
down in the same year or the next one. This tells us that in socialist
construction we must firmly establish the idea of relying on agriculture
as the foundation for developing the national economy.

### _The Ultimate Solution for Agriculture Lies in Mechanization_

Since agriculture is the foundation of the national economy, it is
necessary to treat the development of agriculture as a priority in
developing the national economy. Only when agriculture is developed as
the foundation of the national economy can light industry, heavy
industry, and other economic, cultural, and educational enterprises be
developed.

How can agriculture be developed? The socialist country cannot adopt
agricultural mechanization before agricultural collectivization.
Agricultural collectivization must precede the use of large machines.
But after the realization of agricultural collectivization, it is very
important to realize agricultural mechanization on the basis of
agricultural collectivization. On the eve of China's upsurge in
agricultural cooperativization, Chairman Mao had already
pointed out that China's countryside required not only the realization
of the social reform of converting the individual ownership system to
the collective ownership system, but also the realization of the
technical innovation of converting hand labor to mechanical production.

"Only when the socialist transformation of her social economic system is
thoroughly completed and machine operation is fully adopted in all
sectors and areas where machine operation is feasible in her technology
can China's social economic outlook be completely transformed."
<a id="6">[[6]](#bot_6)</a> After the
victorious realization of China's agricultural cooperativization and
rural people's communes, Chairman Mao opportunely proposed the grand
task of steadily realizing agricultural mechanization. He clearly
pointed out, "The ultimate solution of the agriculture problem lies in
mechanization." When the stimulative role of socialist production
relations with respect to the productive forces is fully exploited and
with the support of socialist industry, especially heavy industry, the
pace of achieving agricultural mechanization will be quickened.

Before liberation, old China was a very backward agricultural country.
In 1949, the food grain output of the whole country amounted to only
216.2 billion [chin]. After liberation when socialist
production relations were established and developed in the rural areas
through agricultural cooperativization and the people's communes,
agricultural production developed substantially. The output of food
grain in 1971 reached 492 billion [chin], more than twice
the amount of 1949. But the level of mechanization in China's
agriculture is not high. Agricultural labor productivity is still
relatively low. Compared with other countries where the level of
agricultural mechanization is relatively high, China's agricultural
production is still in a relatively backward condition. This condition
is not in line with the development of China's industry and other
sectors of the national economy. Therefore, it is necessary to further
realize agricultural mechanization and promote a rapid development of
agricultural production on the basis of continuously consolidating and
developing socialist production relations in the rural areas.

When machines are used in plowing, sorting, harvesting, and
transportation, agricultural labor productivity will be raised tens and
hundreds of times. If he plows by hand, a veteran worker can only plow
one [mou] a day. With an ox, a man can plow four
[mou] a day. With a medium or large tractor, several tens to
several hundreds of [mou] can be plowed in a day, thus
raising agricultural labor productivity by tens to hundreds of times.
The labor power thus saved through agricultural mechanization can be
used to increase production both intensively and extensively by raising
the per unit area yield and promoting the rural development of
agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry, sideline production, and
fishery. It can also be used to support the development needs of other
sectors of the national economy.

The realization of agricultural mechanization can also raise the
capacity to combat natural calamities and change the situation of
depending on the weather for food. China is a country of vast area. Some
degree of drought and flooding occurs every year. With electric drainage
and irrigation machines, water can be controlled readily. The resulting
reduction in damage due to possible droughts or floods will guarantee a
steady and high yield in agricultural production. The poor and
lower-middle peasants put it well: "The sound of machines in the river
brings joy to the crops in the field. With no fear of drought and
flooding, good harvests and high yields are guaranteed."

Under the guidance of Chairman Mao's proletarian revolutionary line, and
especially after the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution, there has
been a rapid development in China's agricultural mechanization.
Comparing 1970 with 1965, the electricity consumption in the rural areas
increased by 1.6 times, electric drainage and irrigation machines more
than doubled, the ownership of large and medium tractors increased by
more than 70 percent, the ownership of hand-held tractors increased by
nearly 20 times, and the machine-plowed area represented nearly 20
percent of the cultivable area. With the gradual realization of
agricultural mechanization in China, the drought control and drainage
capacity of agriculture will continuously increase. The
people's ability to combat natural calamities will continuously be
strengthened. And the steady growth of agricultural production will be
more assured. From this we can see that the further realization of
agricultural mechanization on the basis of agricultural collectivization
is a necessary path for developing agricultural productivity.

In the process of gradually realizing agricultural mechanization, the
material basis of the collective economy will grow daily, and the
three-level ownership system of the rural people's commune will be
further consolidated and developed. The experience of agricultural
mechanization has demonstrated that large - and medium-sized
agricultural machines can be fully exploited only if they are owned by
the commune and the production brigade. Consequently, with the
development of agricultural mechanization, the scale and role of the
collective economy at the commune and brigade levels will gradually
expand, and the superiority of the people's commune will be further
revealed. Thus, the poor and lower-middle peasants will love the
people's commune all the more and will be all the more resolute in
following the socialist road. The poor and lower-middle peasants used a
vivid language to depict the necessity for agricultural mechanization:
"The People's commune is full of power. The collective economy blooms
with a red flower. With agricultural mechanization, even a class-twelve
typhoon will fail to overpower."

### _In Agriculture, Learn from Tachai_

It is an inevitable trend in the development of socialist agriculture to
gradually realize agricultural mechanization on the basis of
collectivization. But, agricultural mechanization must be under the
command of revolutionization. Chairman Mao teaches us, "Once the correct
thought representing the advanced class is in the hands of the masses,
it becomes a material strength to transform society and the world."
<a id="7">[[7]](#bot_7)</a> When
the broad masses of poor and lower-middle peasants who are the masters
of socialist agriculture have studied Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tse-tung
Thought and have mastered Chairman Mao's line and general and specific
policies, they possess overwhelming strength and are powerful enough to
tame mountains and harness rivers. They can transform unfavorable
natural conditions into favorable ones, transform low yields into high
yields, advance from a condition of owning no agricultural machines to
owning various agricultural machines and fully realizing the superiority
of agricultural mechanization. This is how Tachai Production Brigade of
Tachai Commune in Hsi-yang [hsien], Shansi Province, was
transformed.

Tachai Production Brigade is situated in the Taihang Mountains. Before
agricultural collectivization, it was a poor mountainous area with
plenty of rocks and little soil. The poor and lower-middle peasants of
Tachai described it as: "The mountain is high, and rocks are plentiful.
When you go outside, you have to clamber up slopes. There are less than
3.5 [mou] of land for each family. Natural disasters are
commonplace." When the primary cooperative was started in 1953, the
average per [mou] yield of food grain was 250 chin. In the
process of developing from the primary cooperative to the advanced
cooperative and then to the people's commune, the Party branch of Tachai
Production Brigade firmly adhered to the principle of putting
proletarian politics in command. It issued the slogan of "transform the
people, transform the land, and transform the yield," used Mao Tse-tung
Thought to educate the cadres and the masses, and carried out a big
transformation in agricultural production through an ideological
revolution among the people. The cadres and the masses of Tachai Brigade
smashed the sabotage of the landlord, the rich peasant, the
counterrevolutionary, and the bad elements and resisted interference
from the revisionist line pushed by the Liu Shao-ch'i and Lin Piao
clique. Under the guidance of Chairman Mao's great policy of
selfreliance through arduous struggle, Tachai Brigade engaged in capital
construction for water control and transformed the "three lost fields"
in which water, fertilizers, and soil were lost because of poor
construction into "three retained fields" in which water, fertilizers,
and soil were retained after the fields had been leveled
and terraced. The average per [mou] yield of food grain in
Tachai Brigade was gradually raised from 250 [chin] in 1953
to 543 [chin] in 1958, 802 [chin] in 1964, and
1,096 [chin] in 1967. Simultaneous with the rapid growth of
food-grain production, Tachai Brigade realized an all-round development
of agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry, and sideline production. In
this process of "transforming the people, transforming the land, and
transforming the yield," the Party branch of Tachai Brigade also led the
commune members to use their own hands to combine indigenous and foreign
technology to substantially advance the mechanization of plowing,
cultivating, threshing, transporting, and processing food grain and
fodder and to advance on the road of putting mechanization under the
command of revolution. The heroic attitude of the poor and lower-middle
peasants to fight Nature and farm for revolution is a powerful criticism
and repudiation of the reactionary fallacies of Lin Piao who slandered
the worker-peasant laboring people saying, "All they think about is how
to make money, get rice, oil, salt, sauce, vinegar, and firewood, and
take care of their wives and children," and who championed the Confucian
thought that "the little people can only be persuaded by self-interest."

Tachai Brigade is a model of how to develop socialist agriculture
according to Chairman Mao's proletarian revolutionary line. "In
agriculture, learn from Tachai" is a great call from Chairman Mao. If
only we can firmly adhere to arming the cadres and the masses with the
great thought of Mao Tse-tung, then, like Tachai Brigade, we will have
activism, organizational discipline, and the revolutionary spirit of
suffering hardship. We will certainly be able to overcome unfavorable
conditions and create favorable conditions to transform drastically the
outlook of agricultural production.

Because of the interference and sabotage of Liu Shao-ch'i's revisionist
line before the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution, Hsi-yang
[hsien], where Tachai Brigade is situated, did not unfold
the mass movement of learning from Tachai. Its agricultural production
developed very slowly. The total output of food grain in the
[hsien] as a whole hovered around 70 to 80 million
[chin]. The annual maximum sale of food grain
to the state was only 7 million [chin]. The Great
Proletarian Cultural Revolution transformed the outlook of Hsi-yang
[hsien]. Starting from 1967, the whole [hsien]
unfolded the mass movement of learning from Tachai in a big way. It also
resisted the interference and sabotage of Lin Piao's revisionist line.
The people of the whole [hsien] fought heaven and earth,
transformed mountains and rivers, and greatly transformed the land
acreage of Hsi-yang hsien. Agricultural production developed rapidly.
The output of food grain doubled in three years and tripled in five
years. The total output of food grain in 1971 reached 240 million
[chin], three times as high as the peak output before the
Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution. Commodity food grain sold to the
state reached 80 million [chin], an increase of more than
ten times over the record harvest before the Great Proletarian Cultural
Revolution.

The experience of Hsi-yang [hsien]'s learning from Tachai
demonstrates that any difficulties in the human world can be overcome
and any miracle in the human world can be created if the innovative
power of the masses armed with Mao Tse-tung Thought is relied upon. To
deeply unfold the mass movement of learning from Tachai and to let the
Tachai flower bloom all over the country will certainly accelerate the
development of agricultural production, further consolidate the
socialist base in the rural areas, and permit agriculture to play a
greater role as the foundation of the national economy.

### _All Trades and Industries Must Support Agriculture with Their Efforts_

The development of socialist agriculture must primarily rely on the
efforts of the cadres and the poor and lower-middle peasants, the staff
and workers of the state farms, and other laboring peasants who fight on
the agricultural point. But this does not mean that the development of
socialist agriculture has nothing to do with other trades and
industries. Agriculture is the foundation of the national economy.
Agricultural production affects the development of the
whole socialist national economy. If agriculture is not properly
developed, other trades and industries cannot hope to develop either. If
agriculture is properly developed, everything else will do well too. The
development of socialist agriculture is related to all trades and
industries. All trades and industries must put the support of
agriculture in an important position and actively perform the job of
supporting agriculture. The industrial sectors must above all regard the
support of agriculture and the promotion of agricultural mechanization
as a major task. They must resolutely orient their work toward the
objective of treating agriculture as the foundation. Small local
industries such as iron and steel, machine building, chemical
fertilizer, and cement must all the more firmly adhere to the correct
orientation of serving agricultural production.

The support of agriculture by all trades and industries is an important
characteristic of the socialist economy. In capitalist society, industry
exploits agriculture, and the urban areas exploit the rural areas.
Therefore, the relationship between the industrial capitalist and the
laboring peasant is one of class antagonism. In the socialist economy,
after the urban and rural areas have undergone socialist transformation
and on the basis of the socialist public ownership system, the
antagonism between the urban and rural areas and between industry and
agriculture is eliminated. But there are still two forms of the
socialist public ownership system. And because the economic, cultural,
and technological level of the rural areas is still below that of the
urban areas, there still exist substantial disparities between them. The
great program of the proletariat to build socialism and communism
requires that in the process of continually developing agricultural
production and extending social reform and technical innovation in
agriculture, these essential disparities be gradually narrowed and
finally eliminated. Therefore, it is an objective necessity that in
developing the socialist economy all trades and industries lend their
support to agriculture and to raising the economic, cultural, and
technical level of the rural areas. The proletarian party calls on all
trades and industries to firmly establish the thought of
treating agriculture as the foundation of the national economy and to
render their assistance to developing socialist agriculture from all
aspects.

Out of their need to restore capitalism, the bourgeoisie and its agents
inside the proletarian party not only will not narrow the disparities
between the urban and the rural areas, but introduce the capitalist
method of letting industry exploit agriculture and the urban areas
exploit the rural areas. The process of restoring capitalism in the
Soviet Union is also the process of increasing the control and
exploitation of the rural areas by the bureaucratic monopoly bourgeoisie
headed by Brezhnev. The revisionist line of "emphasizing industry at the
expense of agriculture" and "squeezing agriculture to benefit industry"
advocated by the Liu Shao-ch'i clique was also a line that sought to
widen the disparities between the urban and rural areas and between
industry and agriculture and finally to restore capitalism.

Among the people, it is not an easy job to firmly establish the idea of
treating agriculture as the foundation and resolutely carry through the
policy having all trades and industries support agriculture. Under the
influence of the revisionist line, people often develop the idea of
upgrading industry and downgrading agriculture. After agriculture has
reaped bumper harvests for several years in succession, the idea of
treating agriculture as the foundation loses ground in people's minds.
They give lip service to "agriculture, light industry, heavy industry"
but act according to "heavy industry, light industry, agriculture." The
tendency to neglect agriculture in the allocation of capital funds and
the supply of material goods is obvious. These conditions demonstrate
that to firmly establish the idea of agriculture as the foundation, it
is necessary to study seriously the Chairman's theories about the
interrelations among agriculture and light and heavy industry, study
seriously the general policy of developing the national economy with
"agriculture as the foundation and industry as the leading factor," and
further criticize and repudiate the various reactionary
fallacies of modern revisionism that look down on agriculture.

Under the guidance of Chairman Mao's revolutionary line, tens of
millions of educated youths in China have answered his great call that
"educated youths must go to the villages and receive reeducation from
the poor and lower-middle peasants" and have gone to the rural areas and
mountainous areas to fight in the forefront of agricultural production.
This is a social revolution that changes the established customs of
society and a strategic measure for training a large number of
successors to the proletarian revolutionary enterprise. Confucius, the
spokesman for the declining slave-owning class, greatly despised
agricultural labor. His student Fan Ch'ih asked him how to grow crops
and vegetables. He scolded him for being "a small man." Lin Piao, the
faithful disciple of Confucius, completely inherited this reactionary
idea. He maliciously attacked the idea of having educated youths go to
the rural and mountainous areas as being "equivalent to disguised labor
reform." All exploitative classes despise both agriculture and the
peasants. The hopeless intention of these classes is to ride as long as
they can on the shoulders of the laboring people and exploit them.
Chairman Mao thoroughly criticized and repudiated the reactionary ideas
of people like Confucius. He pointed out that "it is correct in
political orientation and work method"
<a id="8">[[8]](#bot_8)</a> for the
revolutionary youth to study revolutionary theories, participate in
production, and join the worker-peasant masses. The rural areas are wide
open. It is extremely important for the maturation of the educated
youths themselves, the construction of a new socialist countryside, the
criticism of Lin Piao and Confucius, and the narrowing of the essential
disparities between the worker and the peasant and between mental and
physical labor that the educated youths go to the rural areas to accept
reeducation from the poor and lower-middle peasants, to participate in
class struggle, production struggle, and scientific experiments in the
rural areas, and to be exposed to various tests and experiences.

[Industry Is the Leading Factor in the Socialist Economy](#)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _Fully Exploit the Role of Industry as the Leading Factor_

Agriculture is the foundation of the national economy. Industry is the
leading factor of the national economy. Industry is not only a sector
which produces the means of livelihood, but is also a sector which
manufactures the means of production. The improvement of the means of
production plays a significant role in the development of social
production. From the historical aspect, the evolution from stone
implements to metal tools to various machines represents not only
milestones but also benchmarks for the various economic epochs of human
society. That industry is the leading factor of the national economy
means that the development of industry will certainly bring forth
advanced tools for the various sectors of the national economy, promote
technical innovations in the national economy, and consequently increase
labor productivity and social production.

Industry is divided into light industry and heavy industry. Light
industry is primarily concerned with producing the means of livelihood.
Heavy industry is primarily concerned with producing capital goods and
manufacturing the means of production \[tools\]. To play the role of the
leading factor in the national economy, it is necessary to give full
scope to heavy industry which produces capital goods and manufactures
the means of production. In socialist society, the role of heavy
industry as the leading factor in the national economy is described as
follows: to provide various modern agricultural machines, motive power,
chemical fertilizers, pesticides, and other means of production for
agriculture; to produce various light industrial machines and light
industrial raw materials and promote technical innovation and labor
productivity in light industry so that light industry can provide
ever-richer and more varied industrial products for daily use; and to
provide modern equipment for transportation, construction,
and national defense industries in order to promote technical innovation
and development in these fields. From these, we can see that the role of
heavy industry as the leading factor is not only manifested as the
necessary condition for realizing agricultural mechanization, but is
also manifested as a necessary condition for realizing technical
innovation for the whole national economy and is a necessary condition
for consolidating national defense, guaranteeing national security,
strengthening proletarian dictatorship, and supporting world revolution.
Just as Chairman Mao pointed out, "Without industry, there will be no
strong national defense, no welfare for the people, and no rich and
strong country." <a id="9">[[9]](#bot_9)</a>
The role of industry as the leading factor is determined by its
important role in the above-mentioned aspects.

That the role of industry as the leading factor is primarily realized by
heavy industry does not mean that light industry is not important.
Although light industry does not produce production tools, it is still
an important sector of the socialist national economy. It is basically a
sector for the production of the means of livelihood. Like agriculture,
it is an indispensable sector for reproduction of labor power. Light
industry is a necessary complement to agriculture. It processes
agricultural and sideline products, produces various necessary means of
livelihood for the laboring people of the urban and rural areas, and
assists agriculture to play better the role of the foundation in the
national economy. Compared with heavy industry, light industry is
characterized by small investment and quick returns. Light industry
provides capital accumulation for the state and is an important source
of capital funds for building heavy industry. Chairman Mao paid special
attention to the position and role of light industry in the national
economy. He pointed out, "When agriculture and light industry are
developed, heavy industry will develop faster with the availability of
markets and capital funds."
<a id="10">[[10]](#bot_10)</a> Chairman Mao
clearly pointed out that the development of heavy industry depends not
only on agriculture, but also on light industry. He pointed out the
important role of light industry which people easily forget.

### _Gradually Realize Socialist Industrialization_

The important role of industry in the national economy objectively
requires the socialist country to pay attention to the development of
socialist industry. For countries in which industrial development is
relatively backward, an important task facing the proletariat after it
seizes political power is rapidly to develop modern industry, realize
socialist industrialization, and build the originally economically
backward country into a strong socialist country with modern
agriculture, modern industry, modern national defense, and modern
science and technology.

In addition to more fully bringing into play the role of industry as the
leading factor and thus guaranteeing the independence of the national
economy and consolidating national defense, the realization of socialist
industrialization has a more far-reaching significance. The gradual
realization of socialist industrialization will certainly increase the
proportion of the sector of the economy under state ownership and
strengthen the leading capacity of the state economy in the whole
national economy. The development of socialist industrialization will
accelerate the development of industry in areas where industry was
formerly backward and change the irrational distribution of industries.
At the same time, the ranks of the working class will expand, which will
be favorable to strengthening the leadership of the working class over
the whole country. The gradual realization of socialist
industrialization will also certainly accelerate agricultural
mechanization and raise industry's capacity to support agriculture, thus
creating favorable conditions for gradually narrowing the disparities
between the urban and rural areas and between the worker and the
peasant. It is precisely because of the significance of the realization
of socialist industrialization that Chairman Mao, in personally
directing the formulation of the Party's General Line in the 1953
transition period, stipulated that gradual socialist industrialization
is an important task which the whole Party and the whole people should
strive to achieve.

Old China was a semicolonial and semifeudal country. Under
the oppression of imperialism, feudalism, and bureaucratic capitalism,
the level of production was extremely backward. There were very few
modern industries. The few modern industries that existed consisted
primarily of light industry and textile industry. When the country was
liberated in 1949, the annual output of steel was only 158,000 tons.
There was nothing to speak of in many important industrial sectors.

Faced with this "poor and blank" condition inherited from old China, to
rapidly realize socialist industrialization was a very pressing problem
for the Chinese proletariat who wielded political power. In the past
more than twenty years under the brilliant leadership of Chairman Mao,
significant measures have been taken to accelerate the realization of
socialist industrialization.

To realize socialist industrialization in China, it is necessary to
build a complete socialist industrial system which combines large,
medium, and small enterprises, which is distributed geographically in a
comparatively rational manner, and in which the iron and steel industry
and the machine-building industry are the center. This national
industrial system is built on the foundation of existing industrial
systems in various coordinated regions and provinces. Once modern
industrial systems that are complete and relatively independent but
which all vary according to local conditions have been established in a
planned fashion and step by step in every coordinated region and within
the framework of many provinces, the formation of the national
industrial system will take place very quickly.

How to realize socialist industrialization? Chairman Mao pointed out to
us that "the problem of what path to follow in industrialization refers
primarily to the interrelation among heavy industry, light industry, and
agriculture."
<a id="11">[[11]](#bot_11)</a> To
realize socialist industrialization, it is of course necessary to give
priority to developing heavy industry. But, giving priority to
developing heavy industry does not mean that agriculture and light
industry can be ignored. Chairman Mao pointed out: "China's economic
construction is centered around heavy industry. This point must be
affirmed. But at the same time we must pay full attention to developing
agriculture and light industry."
<a id="12">[[12]](#bot_12)</a> Based on the
interrelations among agriculture, light industry, and heavy industry,
Chairman Mao formulated a revolutionary line to realize socialist
industrialization with greater, faster, and better results at lower
costs, namely, to develop heavy industry by developing more light
industry and agriculture. Through this method, agriculture and light
industry have developed. They not only can provide ever-greater amounts
of the means of livelihood and improve people's lives, but can also
solve the problem of capital accumulation and markets for heavy industry
in order to make the development of heavy industry more stable and
reliable. From a long-range viewpoint, this method will lead to greater
and better development of heavy industry.

In opposition to Chairman Mao's revolutionary line, there was the
revisionist line advocated by the Liu Shao-ch'i and Lin Piao clique
which had fewer, slower, and poorer results at higher costs, namely,
developing heavy industry at the expense of agriculture and light
industry. Because it neglects the development of agriculture and light
industry, this line of lopsidedly developing heavy industry does not
meet the requirements of the peasants to strengthen the collective
economy; it does not take care of the livelihood of the broad masses and
will certainly result in discontent among the people and the improper
development of heavy industry.

Under the guidance of Chairman Mao's revolutionary line, the revisionist
line of Liu Shao-ch'i and Lin Piao has been criticized and repudiated,
the interrelations among agriculture, light industry, and heavy industry
have been correctly handled, brilliant results have been achieved in
China's socialist industrialization, and the rudiments of an independent
and modern industrial system have been developed.

### _In Industry, Learn from Tach'ing_

The process of socialist industrialization is a process of intense
struggle between two classes, two roads, and two lines. In
the process of leading China to realize socialist industrialization,
Chairman Mao advocated, in addition to scientifically pointing out a
road for socialist industrialization based on the interrelations among
agriculture, light industry, and heavy industry, important policies such
as independence, self-reliance, arduous struggle, and "smash foreign
conventions and follow our own road to develop industry." It was a
pointed criticism and repudiation of the "slavish submission to foreign
conventions" and the "snail's pace" advocated by the Liu Shao-ch'i and
Lin Piao clique. Following Chairman Mao's teaching, China's working
class displayed the revolutionary spirit of daring to think, daring to
speak up, and daring to act and gave impetus to the rapid development of
China's industrial construction. The Tach'ing Oil Field is an industrial
model for building socialism with greater, faster, and better results at
lower costs. In the struggle between the two lines, it firmly adhered to
Chairman Mao's proletarian revolutionary line.

The new Tach'ing Oil Field was formerly a barren plain. When several
hundreds of thousands of staff and workers arrived there in 1960 to
construct the oil field, it was "a blue sky above and a grass plain
below." The weather was cold and the ground was frozen. There were no
houses, no beds, no cooking equipment. Production conditions were also
very difficult. Several dozens giant drilling machines were soon set up
on the grass plain. But the equipment was incomplete; there were not
enough trucks or cranes and no highways. Roads were muddy. Water and
electricity supplies were grossly inadequate. Under such difficult
conditions, the heroic Tach'ing workers firmly adhered to putting
proletarian politics in command and repeatedly studied Chairman Mao's
works, especially "On Practice" and "On Contradictions." They armed
their minds with Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tsetung Thought, fought heaven and
earth, fought class enemies, and displayed the revolutionary spirit of
self-reliance and arduous struggle. In just a little over three years, a
big, first-class oil field had been established in China with high speed
and high quality. China has been basically self-sufficient in oil
products since 1963. The Tach'ing workers also conducted a large amount
of scientific research and solved several important
technical problems concerning world oil field exploitation. Following
Chairman Mao's teaching concerning how to run an enterprise with
diligence and thrift, the total state investment was recovered in 1963.
On the eve of "May Day" in 1974, the capital it had accumulated for the
state amounted to eleven times the state investment, achieving greater,
faster, and better results at lower costs. Even more important, the
Tach'ing Oil Field has trained a worker corps that has class
consciousness, drive, a good style of work, organization, and discipline
and which can endure hardship and fight hard battles. It is because of
this revolutionized corps that the Tach'ing Oil Field develops
continuously and rapidly and embodies a great victory for Chairman Mao's
proletarian revolutionary line.

The Tach'ing Oil Field is a red banner on China's socialist industrial
front. "In industry, learn from Tach'ing" is Chairman Mao's great call.
There is a basic similarity between the Tach'ing Oil Field and the
Tachai Brigade. Comrade Chou Enlai pointed out in his Political Report
to the Tenth National Party Congress: "The basic experience of our
socialist construction over the past twenty years is to rely on the
masses. To learn from Tach'ing in industry and Tachai in agriculture, it
is necessary to adhere firmly to putting proletarian politics in
command, launch mass movements in a big way, and fully exploit the
enthusiasm, wisdom, and creativity of the broad masses." The experience
of Tach'ing demonstrated that to educate people with
Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tse-tung Thought and to build a workers1 corps is
the most basic thing in socialist enterprise construction. With such a
corps of iron and steel armed with Mao Tse-tung Thought, there is no
fear of hardship or difficulties. The harder it is, the further the
corps will advance, overcoming all difficulties in order to build
socialist industries with greater, faster, and better results at lower
costs. People like Lin Piao slandered the working class as being merely
interested in "livelihood." The Tach'ing experience is a slap in their
faces. In building socialist industry, whether the political and
ideological education of the staff and workers is given
priority, whether we trust the masses, whether we dare to
mobilize the masses, whether we insist on following the mass line, and
whether the road of selfreliance and arduous struggle is followed are
important indicators of whether the banner of "In industry, learn from
Tach'ing" is truly upheld and whether Chairman Mao's revolutionary line
has been truly executed.

Chairman Mao's call for "In industry, learn from Tach'ing" indicated the
direction for China's industrial development. It greatly aroused the
working class of China to be self-reliant, strive hard, and rapidly
transform the outlook of China's industry. The penetrating unfolding of
the mass movement to "Learn from Tach'ing in industry" will certainly
accelerate the pace of China's socialist industrialization and build
China into a great socialist country with modern agriculture, modern
industry, modern national defense, and modern science and technology.

[The National Economic Plan Must Follow the Order of Agriculture, Light Industry, and Heavy Industry](#)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _Promote the Rapid Development of the National Economy Following the Order of Agriculture, Light Industry, and Heavy Industry_

That agriculture is the foundation and industry is the leading factor of
the national economy is an objective necessity. The general policy of
"agriculture as the foundation, industry as the leading factor"
formulated by Chairman Mao to develop the national economy correctly
reflects this necessity and is a model for developing the socialist
national economy.

Under the guidance of the General Line for building socialism and the
general policy for developing the national economy, China's national
economic plan is arranged in the order of agriculture, light industry,
and heavy industry which Chairman Mao suggested. That is to say, in
arranging the national economic plan, we must start from agriculture and
place agriculture in the primary position. Whether it is in the
allocation of capital funds or the supply of material goods, the needs
of agriculture cannot be neglected. At the same time, we
must also take care that the development of heavy industry and other
sectors of the national economy cannot exceed the amount of food grain,
raw materials, capital funds, and labor force that can be provided by
agriculture. The development of heavy industry must be based on the
foundation of developing agriculture and light industry. In China, as a
result of the implementation of this policy, the relations between
industry and agriculture are relatively harmonious. Agricultural
production and industrial production steadily increase. The market is
thriving, and prices are stable. A prosperous and lively scene prevails
over industrial and agricultural production. Historical experience
demonstrates that the development of the national economy in the
socialist country must take agriculture as the foundation and industry
as the leading factor and correctly handle the relations among
agriculture, light industry, and heavy industry. This is an indisputable
truth. Unlike China, Soviet revisionist social imperialism exploits and
oppresses its laboring people at home and engages in aggression and
expansion abroad. It frantically militarizes its national economy,
develops the armament industry at all costs, destroys the development
relations among agriculture, light industry, and heavy industry, and
leads its national economy into severe crises. These measures of the
Brezhnev clique that wants "more guns at the expense of butter" lead to
severe inflation, commodity shortages in the market, and short supplies.
The laboring people are impoverished.

### _The Order of Agriculture, Light Industry, and Heavy Industry Will Certainly Promote the Consolidation of the Worker-Peasant Alliance_

The problem of the development relations among agriculture, light
industry, and heavy industry in the socialist national economy is not
only a question of the proportional relations among these national
production sectors; it is also a question of the interrelations between
the workers and the peasants and a question of the worker-peasant
alliance.

Under the socialist system, the basic interests of the
worker and the peasant are identical. Under the leadership of the
working class, the mutually supporting and promoting worker-peasant
alliance is established for a common struggle to build socialism and
realize communism. But certain disparities still exist between the urban
and rural areas and between the worker and the peasant with respect to
economics, culture, technology, and material livelihood. These
disparities are the remnants of the old society. To allow these
disparities to exist for a long time, or even to expand, and not to
create conditions to narrow or eliminate the disparities is detrimental
to the consolidation of the worker-peasant alliance.

In his analysis of the relations between the leading class and the class
which is led, Chairman Mao pointed out: "The leading class and Party, in
order to exercise leadership over the class, stratum, political party or
people's organization to be led, must possess two characteristics: (A)
lead the one which is led (the ally) to fight a determined battle
against the common enemy and win and (B) provide material welfare to the
one which is led; at least, do not hurt their interests and give them
political education."
<a id="13">[[13]](#bot_13)</a> After the
working class has seized political power, led the peasants to overthrow
the landlord class, and realized land reform and agricultural
collectivization, it is still necessary to lead the peasants to fight a
determined battle against the class enemy in the rural areas, conduct
socialist education to help them further realize agricultural
mechanization on the basis of collectivization, raise their material and
cultural living standards gradually on the basis of production
development, and lead them to follow resolutely the socialist road. This
way, the disparities between the urban and rural areas can be narrowed
and the worker-peasant alliance can be further consolidated.

Therefore, the arrangement of the national economic plan according to
the order of agriculture, light industry, and heavy industry is
basically an important aspect in the correct handling of the relations
between the worker and the peasant. The essence of this problem is the
issue of consolidating the leadership of the working class,
consolidating the alliance between the worker and the
peasant, having the working class struggle with the bourgeoisie for the
allegiance of the peasants, and a new issue of class struggle under the
socialist system. Chairman Mao's theory concerning the interrelations
among agriculture, light industry, and heavy industry, the general
policy of developing the national economy with "agriculture as the
foundation and industry as the leading factor," and the arrangement of
the national economic plan according to the order of agriculture, light
industry, and heavy industry indicated the road to solving these
problems.

### _Major Study References_

Marx, _Capital_, Vol. 3, Chapter 37.

Chairman Mao, "On the Correct Handling of Contradictions among the
People," Sections 3 and 12.

### _Review Problems_

1\. Why do we say that agriculture is the foundation of the national
economy? How can the job of supporting agriculture be done well?

2\. Why do we say industry is the leading factor of the national economy?
Why must attention be paid to the development of agriculture and light
industry while developing heavy industry?

3\. What is the immense significance of correctly handling the relations
among agriculture, light industry, and heavy industry?

_Notes_
-------------------

<a id="bot_s_a">[\*](#s_a)</a> Fa-chan kuo-min ching-chi pi-hsü i nung-yeh
wei chi-ch'u kung-yeh wei chu-tao -- she-hui-chu-i nung-yeh ch\'ing
kungyeh ho chung kung-yeh ti hsiang-hu kuan-hsi.

<a id="bot_1">[[1]](#1)</a> Marx, "'Money': One of the 1857-1858
Manuscripts on Economics," quoted from _Marx, Engels, Lenin, and Stalin
on Communist Society, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she_, 1958, p. 67.

<a id="bot_2">[[2]](#2)</a> Marx, _Capital_, Vol. 3, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1966, p. 918.

<a id="bot_3">[[3]](#3)</a> "On the Correct Handling of Contradictions
among the People," _Selected Readings from the Works of Mao
Tse-tung_, (Type A), Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1965, p. 362.

<a id="bot_4">[[4]](#4)</a> Ibid., p. 362.

<a id="bot_5">[[5]](#5)</a> "On Coalition Government," _Selected Works of
Mao Tsetung_, Vol. 3, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 978.

<a id="bot_6">[[6]](#6)</a> "On Agricultural Cooperativization,"
_Selected Readings from the Works of Mao Tse-tung_, (Type
A), Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1965, p. 314.

<a id="bot_7">[[7]](#7)</a> "Where Does People's Correct Thought Come
from?" _Selected Readings from the Works of Mao Tse-tung_,
Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1965, p. 383.

<a id="bot_8">[[8]](#8)</a> "The Orientation of the Youth Movement,"
_Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung_, Vol. 2, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1968, pp. 532-33.

<a id="bot_9">[[9]](#9)</a> "On Coalition Government," _Selected Works
of Mao Tsetung_, Vol. 3, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 981.

<a id="bot_10">[[10]](#10)</a> "On the Correct Handling of Contradictions
among the People," _Selected Readings from the Works of Mao
Tse-tung_, (Type A), Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1965, p. 362.

<a id="bot_11">[[11]](#11)</a> Ibid., p. 362.

<a id="bot_12">[[12]](#12)</a> Ibid., p. 362.

<a id="bot_13">[[13]](#13)</a> "On Some Important Problems of the Party's
Present Policy," _Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung_, Vol. 4,
Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 1168.
