[*19* Exchange Is an Economic Form That Relates Production to Consumption](#) 
================================================================================================================

[Socialist Exchange and Currency
Circulation](#)<a id="s_a">[\*](#bot_s_a)</a>

Most of the products of socialist labor enter the realm of production
consumption and personal consumption only through exchange. What are the
characteristics of socialist exchange? How is it realized? What are the
objective laws governing it? In developing the socialist economy, these
are the issues that must be clearly understood.

[Socialist Exchange Possesses Brand-new Qualities and Characteristics](#)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _Socialist Exchange Is a New Type of Exchange in History_

Exchange is determined by production. The fact that socialist production
is a new type of production in the history of mankind determines that
socialist exchange must also be a new type of exchange in the history of
mankind. To recognize the qualities and characteristics of socialist
exchange, first and foremost, one must see what essential exchange
relations actually exist in socialist society.

For a considerable period of time, there have existed in
socialist society the following major exchange relations: (1) the
exchange relations among socialist state enterprises, the basis of which
is the relative operational and managerial independence of state
enterprises; (2) the exchange relations between the socialist state
economy and the collective economy, the basis of which is the existence
of two systems of socialist ownership; (3) the exchange relations within
the socialist collective economy, the basis of which is that the means
of production and the products belong to the different collective
economies; (4) the exchange relations among peasants, as well as between
peasants and the urban population and between peasants and the socialist
commercial sector, the basis of which is the existence of family
sideline production carried on by members of the rural people's commune;
and (5) the exchange relations between state enterprises and their staff
and workers, the basis of which is the socialist state's distribution of
personal consumer goods to the staff and workers by means of money
wages.

The above five types of exchange can be classified into three forms
according to the economic relations they reflect.

The first exchange relationship represents one form. This is exchange
within the socialist state ownership system. Through exchange, products
pass from one state enterprise to another, but they are still state
property; no transfer of ownership rights is involved. The only change
is that these products are used by different enterprises. We know that
the exchange of commodities is an exchange between different owners.
Exchange between state enterprises is not exchange between different
owners. Therefore, this type of exchange has lost the basic
characteristic of commodity exchange. It begins to resemble the direct
social distribution of products of the future communist society.
However, because each state enterprise is still a relatively independent
unit of operation, prices are still set in exchanges, and the principle
of equivalent compensation is adopted. Thus, exchanges between state
enterprises still possess certain characteristics of
commodity exchange.<a id="s_a_2">[\*](#bot_s_a_2)</a> This form of
exchange, because it has lost the basic property of commodity exchange,
should be called product exchange to distinguish it from commodity
exchange between different owners.

The second through fourth types of exchange relations represent another
form. Even though there are big differences in these three types of
exchange relations, some exchanges being based on the socialist public
ownership system and others on family sideline production, reflecting
the complex relations of labor exchange between workers and peasants and
among peasants, these types of exchange are still exchanges between
different ownership systems or different owners. Here, after an
exchange, the ownership rights to the products have been transferred.
Therefore, they still possess the basic features of general commodity
exchange. This form of exchange should be called commodity exchange.

The fifth type of exchange relationship differs from the above two
forms. The way in which the staff and workers of state enterprises use
their labor compensation to buy consumer goods resembles Marx's
description: "He obtains a certificate from society, certifying that he
provided a certain amount of labor (minus the labor he contributed to
the social fund). He uses this certificate to get from the society's
accumulation an amount of consumer goods equal to the labor he provided.
He provides society with one form of labor and takes back the whole
amount in another form."
<a id="1">[[1]](#bot_1)</a> This
is also an exchange. The same principle is used to regulate commodity
exchange. Namely, a certain amount of labor in one form is exchanged for
an equal amount of labor in another form. However, this exchange has
already assumed a new content. The staff and workers of the socialist
society are the masters of the state and the enterprises. They do not
sell their labor power. The exchange between the state and the staff and
workers is a special type of exchange. It is actually a form of
distribution of personal consumer goods among staff and workers in the
socialist state. This type of exchange, because it involves a transfer
of ownership rights and because the same principle used in the exchange
of commodities of equal value applies here, will still be treated in the
category of commodity exchange in our later analysis.

These five types of exchange relations which take three different forms
can finally be grouped according to two aspects, product exchange and
commodity exchange. These two types of exchange are different in nature
and have their own characteristics.

Product exchanges between state enterprises are mainly exchanges of
means of production. This type of exchange is a link between production
and production consumption and is directly related to production; it is
an act of production.

Because socialist product exchange is directly related to production and
because socialist production develops in a planned and proportional way,
the exchange of important means of production must be allocated by the
state strictly according to the plan rather than through market
transactions. Although socialist commodity exchange is also carried on
under the guidance of state plans, it cannot be allocated through the
plans because the objects of exchange, being mainly personal consumer
goods, can only be exchanged through market transactions.

Since socialist product exchange is realized through state planned
allocation, any contradictions in supply and demand can be resolved in a
planned manner by the state by adjusting production or product
circulation plans or by economizing and finding substitutes. Here, the
law of value no longer has any regulatory significance; it merely has a
little influence. The law of value, however, does have a certain
regulatory function in socialist commodity exchange. Although the total
amount and composition of consumer goods entering circulation are
determined by the state plans and although the society's purchasing
power is also regulated by the state plans, state planning is for the
purpose of guaranteeing people's livelihood needs. Through
a state circulation plan for consumer goods, personal consumer goods
still go through the market. The socialist state cannot dictate what and
how much the consumer should buy. Under normal circumstances, if the
prices of some personal consumer goods are too high, their sales volume
declines. If their prices are too low, their sales volume expands.
Having recognized this law, the socialist state has to use this
regulatory function under specified conditions to bring about an
equilibrium between supply and demand. For example, some luxury
commodities can be sold in definite amounts at prices higher than their
value if demand exceeds supply. Conversely, to expand the market and
satisfy people's livelihood needs, daily necessities can be sold at
prices equal to or below their values if they are produced in a
sufficiently large quantity to meet all demand.

Product exchange in the socialist society is unprecedented in history.
Commodity exchange in the socialist society is also different in
principle from any historical commodity exchange. Commodity exchange
from the slave society to the capitalist society is all based on the
private ownership system. With the exception of those exchanges of
family sideline products produced by members of rural people's communes
and inhabitants of cities and towns, commodity exchange in the socialist
society is all based on the socialist public ownership system. Its
purpose is to satisfy the needs of the state and the people. It is a new
form of exchange. Under socialist product exchange and commodity
exchange, there begin to emerge elements of direct social distribution
of the means of production and consumer goods, unfolding the promising
prospect of developing from a socialist to a communist society.

### _Exchange in Turn Promotes the Development of Production and the Improvement of People's Livelihood_

In the process of social reproduction, production plays a determining
role. However, exchange directly and indirectly reacts with it. Engels
said: "The two functions \[of production and exchange\] are
always mutually constrained and interdependent. They can be called the
abscissa and the coordinate of the economic curve."
<a id="2">[[2]](#bot_2)</a> This statement of
Engels is applicable to commodity as well as to product exchange.

The development of socialist industrial and agricultural production is
the material basis of socialist product and commodity exchanges.
Chairman Mao pointed out as early as 1942 that to "develop the economy
and guarantee supplies constitute the general policy of our economic and
financial work." <a id="3">[[3]](#bot_3)</a>
This is to say, only when agricultural production is developed can there
be enough means of production to satisfy the needs for further
developing production and expanding capital construction and can there
be enough consumer goods to enliven the market and stabilize prices.
Without the development of industrial and agricultural production, it is
impossible to improve socialist product and commodity exchanges.

On the other hand, socialist exchange also plays an immense initiating
role in the development of socialist industrial and agricultural
production. Through socialist product exchange, the exchange of material
resources among various regions of the country and among various state
enterprises in different sectors of the national economy is realized.
Through socialist commodity exchange, the economic relations between
agriculture and industry, production and consumption, the economy under
the state ownership system and that under the collective ownership
system, and the urban and rural areas are achieved. State material
resources departments in charge of socialist product exchange actively
organize the exchange of the means of production among state
enterprises. The socialist commercial departments responsible for
socialist commodity exchange actively organize and purchase commodities
at the appropriate time from the industrial and agricultural production
sectors and sell them to the consumers in a planned and systematic
manner. This plays an immense role in rapidly developing the national
economy in a planned and proportional manner and in improving the
livelihood of the urban and rural areas. It is also an important aspect
of consolidating the wo rker-peasant alliance.

The promotional role of socialist exchange with respect to
production and consumption can only be fully exercised through people's
correct handling of the various contradictions in the exchange process.

A very important link in actively promoting the development of
production through socialist product exchange is whether the material
resources departments can fully understand and correctly handle the
contradictions between the supply of and the demand for the means of
production within the state ownership system. In the process of
high-speed development in the socialist national economy, on the one
hand, the supply of the means of production generally increases at a
higher speed than that of consumer goods. On the other hand, the
quantity, quality, variety, and specifications of the means of
production often do not fully satisfy the development requirements of
socialist construction. These contradictions between the supply of and
the demand for the means of production will objectively exist for a long
time and will be manifested in the various departments of the national
economy, various regions, and various state enterprises. Only through
regular study and correct management, properly balancing plans and
matching supply with demand, can a continuous relative balance between
the production of, and the requirements for, means of production be
maintained and rapid development of socialist production be achieved.

The process of socialist commodity exchange is even more complex. The
objects of commodity exchange are mainly consumer goods, but they also
include a certain amount of means of production. Relations between the
state economy and the collective economy, within the state economy, and
among the collective economies all exist in commodity exchange. In
complex commodity exchanges, the contradictions between supply and
demand will also exist for a long time. It is concretely manifested in
the contradictions within the specialized commercial departments
responsible for commodity exchange work, agriculture, industry, and
consumers.

The contradictions between socialist commerce and agriculture are mainly
manifested by the proportions of agricultural and sideline
products that are purchased or retained, by purchasing prices, by the
forms in which such products are purchased, and by the supply and prices
of industrial products. Some part of agricultural and sideline
production is commodity production for the satisfaction of social needs.
The other part is self-sufficient production to satisfy the peasant's
own needs. In the process of purchasing, it is necessary to arrange
suitably the proportions of agricultural and sideline products to be
purchased or retained so that the state can obtain the required amount
of agricultural and sideline products and so the peasant can also take
care of his production and livelihood. At the same time, when socialist
commerce purchases agricultural and sideline products, it must also be
good at sending industrial products to the rural areas. It must strive
to ensure the inflow and outflow of goods to satisfy fully the
requirements of both socialist agricultural production and the peasants'
livelihood. The purchasing prices of agricultural and sideline products
and the supply prices of industrial products directly affect the income
of the peasant, the expansion of agricultural production, and state
accumulation. It is necessary to determine reasonable purchasing prices
for agricultural and sideline products and supply prices for industrial
products so that an exchange relationship of equivalent values between
industrial and agricultural products can be maintained. Handling the
contradictions between commerce and agriculture according to correct
principles makes it possible to do a good job in commodity exchanges
between the urban and rural areas and is favorable to mobilizing the
activism of the peasants in socialist production, promoting the
development of industrial and agricultural production, and consolidating
the worker-peasant alliance.

The contradictions between socialist commerce and industry are mainly
internal contradictions in the state economy. State industry is engaged
in production. State commerce is engaged in marketing. The
contradictions between industry and commerce are mainly contradictions
involving the quantity, quality, variety, and price of industrial
products on the one hand and market requirements on the other. There is
a relative stability in industrial production. But market
requirements change. The contradictions between relatively stable
industrial production and variable market requirements often bring about
contradictions between industry and commerce. Another contradiction is
the lack of coordination between the production plan and the marketing
plan, which results from inadequate investigation and research in the
development, changes, and laws of production and the market. The
influence of capitalist ideas of operation or the interference of the
revisionist line further aggravates the contradictions between industry
and commerce. To correctly handle the contradictions between industry
and commerce, the commercial departments must follow the requirements of
the basic economic law of socialism, strengthen investigation and
research, duly report the consumers' requirements to the industrial
departments, bring about closer cooperation between industry and
commerce, and actively help the industrial branches develop production,
expand variety, and raise quality in order to together better satisfy
the needs of the state and the people.

The contradictions between supply and demand in the commodity exchange
process are ultimately manifested as contradictions between socialist
commerce and the broad masses of consumers. With the rapid growth of
industrial and agricultural development, the purchasing power of the
people has been continuously raised. It is natural that they require
socialist commerce to provide a better and greater variety of consumer
goods. However, the growth of social production always lags behind the
growth of social demand. Therefore, correctly handling the
contradictions between commerce and agriculture and between commerce and
industry is the precondition for correctly handling the contradictions
between commerce and the consumers. But this is not enough. To correctly
resolve the contradictions between commerce and the consumers, those who
work in commerce must further establish the concept of wholeheartedly
serving the people. China's commercial workers put it well: "The counter
is limited to three feet high, but service to the workers, peasants, and
soldiers is unlimited." Only when this mental outlook is
established can socialist commerce actively organize supplies of
commodities, rationally allocate commodities, and properly arrange the
socialist market according to the various requirements of the workers,
peasants, and soldiers. At the same time, in organizing for the people's
livelihood, socialist commerce should not merely passively adapt to
consumer demand; it should actively influence consumption, direct
consumption, and do a better job of organizing for the people's
livelihood according to the development conditions of socialist
industrial and agricultural production and the conditions of national
resources.

The sphere of distribution is not merely a place where products and
commodities are exchanged. It is also a battleground for class struggle
between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. This battleground is
familiar to the bourgeoisie, but not as familiar to the proletariat. New
and old bourgeois elements resort to bribery, speculation, and other
illegal means and to inciting improper practices such as barter and
backdoor deals to corrode people's ideology and undermine
socialism.<a id="s_a_3">[\*](#bot_s_a_3)</a> The agents of the
bourgeoisie inside the Party try hard to push the revisionist line which
aims at restoring capitalism in the circulation sphere. The clique of
Liu Shao-ch'i, that renegade, traitor, and scab, widely instituted the
idea of putting "regulations in command" in product exchange, advocated
"service to all the people" in commodity exchange, and encouraged the
evil practice of backdoor deals. This is a betrayal of Marxism. To push
back the frantic attack of the bourgeoisie, we must hold firmly to
Chairman Mao's proletarian revolutionary line, criticize the revisionist
line, hold firmly to having proletarian politics in command, and observe
and handle problems with the viewpoint of class struggle so that
socialist exchange not only promotes production development and improves
the people's livelihood, but also consolidates the socialist economic
base and proletarian dictatorship.

[Socialist Exchange Must Have Appropriate Forms of Organization](#)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _Product Exchange Needs an Appropriate Supply System and Channels_

The circulation process of the means of production from production to
production consumption is very complex. Appropriate forms of exchange
under the guidance of a central state plan are required so that the
means of production can go from the production sphere to the production
consumption sphere at the proper time, in the right amount, and with
quality to promote the development of production.

The form of product exchange reflects the interrelations in product
exchange among enterprises, among regions, and among departments within
the state ownership system and between the central economic departments
and the local economic departments. China's socialist construction
experience tells us that it is very significant to set up rationally a
system of supply of material resources in handling these interrelations.

China's material resources supply system adopts the principles of
"unified leadership, control by level, and specialized operation" in
line with Chairman Mao's great strategic policy of "be prepared for war,
be prepared for natural disasters, and do everything for the people" and
his teaching "Let the local units do more things under a unified central
plan." As manifested in product exchange, the state classifies the means
of production into three groups according to their significance and
functions in the national economy. The first group is "material
resources under unified allocation." These resources are vital for
developing the national economy. Examples are steel, copper, and
important mechanical and electrical equipment. They are allocated
centrally by the state planning departments to ensure the needs of the
state's important construction projects. The second category is
"material resources which are under the control of a department \[of the
central government\]." These are important resources in the national
economy, such as tin, nickel, and those which are either
highly specialized or are used as supplements to other products, such as
metallurgical furnace materials. They are allocated by the responsible
control departments in a balanced manner. The third group is "material
resources under local control." These are resources not included in the
first and second groups which are controlled by provinces,
municipalities, and autonomous regions. The material resources required
for socialist construction are numerous and varied. If they were all
centrally controlled by the state planning department, socialist
construction could be adversely affected. "Unified leadership, managed
by different levels and operated according to specialization, meets the
need for building socialism with greater, faster, and better results at
lower costs.

At present, based on the above principle, China's material resources
supply system is selectively and systematically adopting the method of
"regional balance, differential allocation, regulation of variety, and
guaranteed delivery to the state under a unified state plan." This
requires that, with a unified state plan and guaranteed delivery to the
state as preconditions, locally produced raw materials and equipment are
balanced locally and complemented locally. This method supports the
implementation of the great strategic policy of preparing for wars,
preparing for natural disasters and doing everything for the people. It
encourages the gradual establishment of an industrial system among
various cooperation regions or even among provinces, the mobilization of
central and local activism, the proper handling of the interrelations
between the central and local units as well as among regions and among
enterprises, and the promotion of production growth.

After a proper material resources supply system is established,
appropriate concrete forms of product exchange and channels for it are
also required to expedite the flow of goods so that the means of
production can be circulated from one state enterprise to another state
enterprise more quickly and economically through rational circulation
links. At present, there are basically three types of concrete forms and
circulation channels in China's product exchange.

The first is direct supply. This is a form of exchange in
which raw materials and equipment produced by a state enterprise are
directly delivered to the user without going through any middle link.
However, it is arranged under a unified state plan and according to the
supply contract among enterprises. This form of product exchange
shortens the circulation time, reduces circulation expenses, stabilizes
the supply and demand relations, and helps improve product equality. It
is the direction of development for the form of product exchange. But,
this form of exchange cannot be used under all circumstances. In
general, it is suitable for circulation among those enterprises where
supply and demand volumes are large and the supply-demand relation of
products is stable.

The second is supply by material resources branches. This is also
conducted under a unified state plan. Like the previous form of
exchange, it is also within the scope of plan allocation. However, it
must go through the material resources branches. In other words,
according to the product supply contract, raw materials and equipment
produced by a state enterprise must first be collected and sent to state
material resources branches. After necessary processing and arrangement
by the material resources branches, they are supplied to enterprises for
consumption. Raw materials and equipment subject to this form of
exchange are generally in great demand, but the demand from individual
units is small. If they were all to be delivered directly by the
producing enterprise to the consuming enterprises, the producing
enterprise would have to have a vast supply organization in order to
deliver goods on time. Consequently, although it seems slower and more
expensive to use state material resources branches rather than direct
supply, in fact, it means that storage charges and transportation fees
can be reduced and the means of production can be supplied faster to the
consuming enterprises. In addition, because the state needs to keep a
reserve of some means of production and state enterprises may also have
a sudden demand for some means of production because of changes in plan
assignments, state material resources branches are needed
to form a middle link for managing and organizing the supplies of the
means of production.

The third is supply organized by commercial branches. These are products
which can be used for production consumption or personal consumption.
Some are small spare parts and small metal tools with assorted
specifications and limited usage. It is more convenient to have these
small and assorted means of production managed by commercial branches so
that they can be bought by the user unit in the market at any time.

### _The Three Channels of Commodity Exchange_

Socialist commodity exchange must also have appropriate channels in
order to facilitate goods circulation and fully exercise its function.
At the present stage, China's socialist commodity exchange is conducted
through the three channels of state commerce, commerce on the basis of
collective ownership, and trade fairs. These three channels of commodity
exchange constitute China's unified socialist market. They perform
different functions according to their different positions.

State commerce is the main body and leading force in the unified
socialist market. It leads the commerce of the collective ownership
system and rural trade fairs. Most of the commodities and all wholesale
links are controlled by state commerce. Commodities are delivered to the
consumer in a planned manner by state commerce according to the
principle of overall design, appropriate arrangement, and guaranteeing
key points.

Commerce taking place under the collective ownership system assists
state commerce. Commerce under the collective ownership system refers
mainly to rural supply and marketing cooperatives. Urban cooperative
stores also belong in the category of commerce under the collective
ownership system.

In China, after the proletariat seized political power, it was faced
with an extremely broad rural market in which the individual economy was
dominant. If this market were not occupied by socialism, it would be
occupied by capitalism and become a hotbed for capitalism.
While actively developing state commerce, the rural laboring people were
mobilized to organize rural supply and marketing cooperatives to
purchase agricultural and sideline products and to supply industrial
products. It was extremely necessary to make the people assistants of
state commerce in the rural areas in order to regulate supply and demand
and control the market. Experience has shown that the establishment and
development of the supply and marketing cooperative in China has played
a very important role in strengthening socialist commerce, severing the
relationship between the individual economy and the capitalist economy,
and promoting the socialist transformation of the individual economy.

The cooperative stores were originally formed by individual workers in
the urban areas. They were a transition from individual commerce to
state commerce. At the present stage, the existence of cooperative
stores makes it convenient for the urban inhabitants to buy daily
commodities.

Rural trade fairs are a supplement to socialist commerce. The small
quantities of family sideline products produced by the collectives'
peasants, with the exception of those retained for their own consumption
and those sold to the state, can be marketed at rural trade fairs
according to state regulations. Trade fairs are places where peasants
exchange what they have for what they want and where peasants exchange
directly with urban people. No middlemen are allowed.

Rural trade fairs have a dual character. On the one hand, they promote
the development of agricultural and sideline production, increase the
team members' income, and enliven the rural economy. On the other hand,
rural trade fairs are an unplanned market. If they are allowed to
develop without control, they will interfere with the socialist planned
market and nurture capitalist power. Under the socialist system, if
rural trade fairs are to be allowed to exist for a period of time,
leadership and management over them must be strengthened in order to
foster their positive role and restrict their negative role so that they
better serve the socialist economy.

[Money Must Be the Servant of Socialist Exchange](#)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _Money under the Socialist System Begins to Acquire New Properties and Functions_

In human history, money appeared as a medium of exchange when trade
developed to a certain degree. Since commodity production and commodity
exchange still exist in socialist society, money is still necessary.

In socialist society, money is not only related to socialist commodity
production and commodity exchange; it is also related to socialist
product production and product exchange. The economic conditions of
socialism have changed the nature and functions of money.

Money, in its relation to commodity production and commodity exchange,
is still an accounting unit under the socialist system, but it no longer
reflects capitalist production relations. Capitalist commodity
production and commodity exchange, which embody the exploitation of
hired labor, are no longer associated with this money. It is associated
instead with socialist commodity production and commodity exchange,
which embody the exchange of labor between the worker and the peasant.

The means of production exchanged among state enterprises, so far as
their leading aspect is concerned, are no longer commodities but
products. However, in its planned leadership over the national economy,
the socialist state must use money as a unified standard to measure
social labor whether in the formulation of production targets, the
allocation of material resources, or the distribution of the total
social product. This means that money under the socialist system begins
to have a new property, namely, a means to measure labor in national
economic planning work. And the further we go, the more important this
new property of money becomes. In the course of development, with the
gradual elimination of commodity production and commodity exchange,
money as an accounting unit will also gradually be
eliminated. Even then, however, a means of measuring labor
will still be necessary in national economic work.

In the distribution of personal consumer goods in socialist society, in
addition to being an accounting unit, money also serves as labor
coupons. The distribution of personal consumer goods in the departments
under socialist state ownership is conducted this way: the state pays
money wages to the staff and workers according to the principle of "from
each according to his ability, to each according to his labor." The
staff and workers use the money to buy the consumer goods they need.
Here, the role of money is similar to that of labor coupons. Marx once
said: "Labor coupons only show the share of common labor contributed by
the individual producer and the share of common products to which he is
entitled." <a id="4">[[4]](#bot_4)</a>

This change in the nature of money under the socialist system reflects
the characteristics of socialist production relations. This change is
embodied in the functions of money.

The first function of money is as a measure of value. This is true also
in socialist society. In socialist society, money is used to measure
both the social labor embodied in commodities and the social labor
embodied in all products. The socialist state uses the function of money
as a measure of value to set the prices of commodities and products and
to fix targets of production, costs, and profits in value terms in order
to exercise planned management of the national economy.

When money acts as a means of circulation in the socialist system, it
serves not only as a medium of exchange for commodities but also as a
medium of exchange for products. In socialist society, this function of
money is carried out by paper currencies. Paper currencies have no
intrinsic value. They are merely value symbols. In China, these value
symbols are the [renminpi] issued by the People's Bank of
China. The function of money in the socialist state is as a means of
circulation to promote the economic relations between industry and
agriculture, between the urban and rural areas, and among state
enterprises.

In socialist society, money performs as a means of payment.
The socialist state enterprise uses this function of money
to pay taxes and profits to the state and wages to the staff and workers
and to repay loans from fraternal enterprises. The socialist state uses
this function of money to centralize and distribute state budget funds
and credit funds.

In socialist society, money also serves as a means of accumulation and
savings. The net social income created by the laboring people becomes
the socialist accumulation of the state in the form of money. The part
of the labor compensation of the laboring people that is not yet spent
is also deposited in the state bank in the form of money to be used to
promote socialist construction.

In the foreign economic relations of the socialist state, gold serves as
a universal currency. In the socialist state's foreign aid and foreign
trade, gold serves as a general means of payment and an embodiment of
social wealth. Because China's [renminpi] is a rare and
stable money in the world, it has earned a good reputation. In China's
foreign trade, more and more countries are willing to use the
[renminpi] as a means of calculating prices and for
international accounting.

In socialist society, because the means of production are publicly
owned, individuals cannot purchase them. Money, therefore, cannot
generally be converted into capital. A decisive blow is thus dealt to
the money fetishism popular under the capitalist system. However, since
money still exists in an independent form as exchange value, money can
be used to purchase almost all consumer goods. Therefore, remnants of
money fetishism must still exist. Lin Piao publicly advocated the
nonsense "Let us all get rich" with the intention of corroding people's
thought with money fetishism and undermining the socialist system.
Therefore, it is an historical mission of the proletariat and the whole
laboring people in the historical stage of socialism to repeatedly
criticize and repudiate such ideas of the exploitative class as "money
can bribe gods," "money can persuade a ghost to work the grinding
stone," and "get promoted and make a fortune" and to wage an unending
struggle against the criminal activities such as corruption, theft,
bribery, speculation, and opening underground factories
which are carried on by new and old bourgeois elements.

### _Use the Law of Money Circulation to Serve Socialist Construction_

In the process of production, exchange, distribution, and consumption,
there is a movement of money corresponding to the movement of
commodities and products. In capitalist society, production and exchange
are carried on blindly and spontaneously. Money circulation in the
market is also carried on blindly and spontaneously. In socialist
society, production, exchange, and distribution are all carried on
according to plans. The socialist state can expand and contract the
money supply in a planned way, achieving planning in money circulation
in order to make it serve socialist construction. To achieve planning in
money circulation, it is first necessary to understand the movement of
money under the socialist system and to know the objective law of money
circulation.

In socialist society, product exchange among state enterprises does not
generally require actual money (cash) transactions. Price calculation in
the product exchange process is performed by using the function of money
as a measure of value. When money performs its function as a measure of
value, no cash is required on hand. Only the concept of money is
required. Payments in the product exchange process are effected through
account clearings in the state bank, so no money transaction is required
for this either.

In socialist society, there are four main channels for issuing and
withdrawing money (money circulation channels).

First, state enterprises, business units, and state organs obtain money
from the state bank to pay wages to staff and workers. Staff and workers
use their wages to buy personal consumer goods or to pay for other labor
expenses. This way, money flows back to the bank through the commercial
sector and service industries. In addition, staff and workers can save
by directly depositing money in the bank without any commodity exchange.

Second, the commercial branches obtain money from the state
bank to purchase agricultural and sideline products from rural
collective economies. A part of the money income from the sale of
agricultural and sideline products is used by the collective economies
to buy chemical fertilizers, insecticides, agricultural machines, and
other means of production from the state. This way, this part of the
money again returns to the bank. Another part of the money income of the
collective economy is distributed to the peasants of the collectives
according to their labor contributions. The peasants use it to buy
industrial products from commercial branches or save it. This way, this
part of the money also ultimately returns to the bank.

Third, through their purchases at trade fairs, a part of the money
income of the urban people also circulates. However, it must also
finally return to the bank through the peasants' purchases of industrial
products and savings deposits.

Fourth, economic transactions among state enterprises, business units,
and state organs are basically conducted by transfers of credit. But
some assorted and small payments also require cash. State enterprises,
business units, and state organs can only retain the amount of cash
specified by the state. Any amount over and above this limit must be
deposited in the state bank. Therefore, the amount of money needed for
such circulation is limited.

These money circulation channels are closely related to socialist
commodity exchange. Money circulation is determined by commodity
circulation. According to the law of money circulation explained by
Marx, the formula for money circulation is:

<div id="eqn0004">
   <table class="mathml">
	  <tbody>
		 <tr>
			<td>
			   <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="block">
				  <semantics>
					 <mrow xmlns:mml="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
						<mtext>Amount of money as means of circulation = </mtext>
						<mfrac>
						   <mrow>
							  <mtext>Total money value of commodities</mtext>
						   </mrow>
						   <mrow>
							  <mtext>Money circulation velocity</mtext>
							  <mtext>.</mtext>
						   </mrow>
						</mfrac>
					 </mrow>
					 <annotation-xml encoding="MathML-Content"></annotation-xml>
				  </semantics>
			   </math>
			</td>
			<td class="math-rb" style="width:10%"></td>
		 </tr>
	  </tbody>
   </table>
</div>

This formula is still valid under the socialist system. This formula
says that the amount of money needed for circulation in a given period
of time is directly proportional to the total money value of commodities
which require money to be realized and inversely
proportional to the velocity of money circulation. Since paper
currencies are only value symbols of money, the issue of paper
currencies should correspond to the amount of money needed for
circulation. Only in this way can the value of money be stable and its
active role in socialist economic movement be fully exercised. If too
little money is issued, commodities may pile up in the circulation
sphere because the medium of exchange is lacking, and they will not
reach the consumer in time. If too much money is issued, it will result
in too much money chasing limited amounts of commodities. The prices of
commodities will then rise in the trade fairs, and the value of the
paper currency will fall. The socialist state consciously uses the law
of money circulation to match money circulation with commodity
circulation and promote the planned movements of socialist production,
exchange, distribution, consumption, and other links through a planned
regulation of the channels of money circulation.

China's [renminpi] is a rare and stable money in the world.
Mainly because under the guidance of Chairman Mao's proletarian
revolutionary line, China's industry and agriculture continuously
develop, fiscal revenues are plentiful, and international payments are
balanced. A strong socialist economy lays a stable material foundation
for China's money and permits the state to release a large amount of
commodities continuously into the market at stable prices to match the
demand from the increasing purchasing power of the people. The stable
value of the [renminpi] is also a result of the state's
conscious use of the law of money circulation and the planned management
of money circulation to realize a balance between income and cash
payments. On the one hand, the state controls the release of money
through a planned regulation of the number of staff and workers, the
rate of wage increases, the purchasing power of state enterprises,
business units, and state organs, and the regulation of the purchasing
prices of agricultural products. On the other hand, the state organizes
the withdrawal of money from circulation by duly and sufficiently
supplying commodities required by the urban and rural people, by
regulating planned prices, and by mobilizing the people to
save. This way, the amount of [renminpi] in circulation is
matched by the amount of circulation required, thus guaranteeing the
stable value of the [renminpi].

The planned regulation of money circulation in the socialist state is
carried on through the state bank. In China, the People's Bank is the
state bank. The People's Bank of China, which issues and withdraws
[renminpi] and regulates money circulation in a planned way
according to the development of production and the requirements of
commodity circulation, becomes a nationwide cash income-outgo center.
The People's Bank of China also centrally organizes noncash account
clearings among all the state economic branches, enterprises, and units.
It is also a nationwide credit center that seeks to achieve a fuller use
of idle money through its deposits and payments purchases. In summary,
all money accounting and payment activities develop from the central
point of the state bank. The socialist bank is not only an economic
organization, but also a state bank in charge of managing the national
economy in the proletarian state. It plays a very important role in
socialist revolution and socialist construction.

### _Major Study References_

Marx, _Capital_, Vol. 1, chapter 3.

Stalin, _Socialist Economic Issues of the Soviet Union_.

### _Review Problems_

1\. What are the new features and characteristics of socialist exchange?
What is the difference between socialist product exchange and commodity
exchange?

2\. What are the forms of organizations and channels through which
socialist product exchange and commodity exchange are realized?

3\. What are the characteristics of the nature and functions of money
under the socialist system? How can the socialist state organize money
circulation in a planned way?

_Notes_
--------------------------------

<a id="bot_s_a">[\*](#s_a)</a> Chiao-huan shih lien-hsi sheng-ch'an ho
hsiao-fei ti ching-chi hsing-shih --- she-hui-chu-i chiao-huan ho huo-pi
liu-t'ung.

<a id="bot_s_a_2">[\*](#s_a_2)</a> According to the socialist definition, the
primary difference between a commodity and a product is that the
commodity involves a transfer of ownership through the market mechanism,
while a product is usually allocated through direct distribution without
any transfer of ownership. --- Editor.

<a id="bot_s_a_3">[\*](#s_a_3)</a> Implied here is the unauthorized or illegal
transactions between state enterprises. --- Editor.

<a id="bot_1">[[1]](#1)</a> Marx, _Critique of the Gotha Program,
Selected Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 3, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 11.

<a id="bot_2">[[2]](#2)</a> Engels, _Anti-Dühring, Selected Works of Marx
and Engels_, Vol. 3, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 186.

<a id="bot_3">[[3]](#3)</a> "Economic and Financial Problems in the
Anti-Japanese War," _Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung_, Vol.
3, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 846.

<a id="bot_4">[[4]](#4)</a> Marx, _Capital_, Vol. 1,
_Complete Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 23, p. 113.
