[*2* Social and Economic Systems Preceding Capitalism](#) 
==========================================================================================

[Production Relations in the Primitive, Slave, and Feudal
Societies](#)<a id="s_a">[\*](#bot_s_a)</a>

The primitive, slave, and feudal societies are the three societal
systems which preceded capitalism. To comprehend the replacement and
substitution of the production relations in these societies helps us to
understand the historical process of the development of production
relations in human society. It is especially significant for the
understanding of the origin and development of capitalist production
relations and the historical law governing their inevitable replacement
by socialist production relations.

[The Primitive Commune Established the Earliest Production Relations in Human History](#)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _Labor Created Man_

The primitive society started from the separation of man from the animal
world. Human societies appeared simultaneously with the emergence of
man. With man, the first chapter of human history began.

The history of human society is about a million years long. Man's
ancestors were a kind of highly developed ape-man. How did the ape-man
develop into man? The key lies in labor. Labor began with
the making of tools. In the process from ape-man to man, natural objects
were transformed into suitable tools. It may only have been the striking
of one stone against another to make stone knives and axes or the
shaping of branches into crude tools, but a great revolution appeared.
Man separated himself from the animal world and could rely on his own
hands to make tools for the transformation and conquest of Nature. Just
as Engels said: Labor "is the first basic condition for human life. This
is true to the extent that we must, in a certain sense, admit that labor
created man himself." <a id="1">[[1]](#bot_1)</a>
In the long process of labor, man learned how to make stone tools, hunt,
and fish. He invented bows and arrows. Especially important was the
discovery and use of fire. This greatly increased man's power to conquer
and transform Nature. Engels highly valued this achievement. He said:
"As far as worldwide liberation is concerned, the discovery of making
fire through friction surpasses the importance of the invention of the
steam engine4'."Because the discovery of making fire through friction
enabled man to control a natural force, he was thus separated from the
animal world." <a id="2">[[2]](#bot_2)</a> From
that time on, human society made its formal appearance on this earth.

Production activities conducted after man's separation from the animal
world were from the start a kind of social and group activity. "Every
individual cooperated with other members of the society to form
production relations to engage in production activities for the material
needs of human life." <a id="3">[[3]](#bot_3)</a>
When the curtains of human social history were raised, the production
relations were those of the primitive commune, and they were the first
production relations in human history.

### _Clan Commune Ownership Was the Basis of the Primitive Commune Production Relations_

The primary social and economic organization of the primitive society
was the clan commune united on the basis of kinship for the purpose of
labor. Clan commune ownership was a primitive form of collective
ownership. Land and other means of production were owned by
all the members of the commune. At that time, because of the crude stone
knives, axes, spears, bows, and arrows used, only by collective labor
could the great natural forces be conquered. Therefore, individual
ownership of means of production and products was not possible. This
clan commune ownership system was the only form adopted under the low
level of productive forces. Means of production collectively owned by
the clan commune included production tools, land, forests, rivers, and
livestock. Weapons, bows, and arrows were carried and used by
individuals.

In the primitive society, all able-bodied members participated in
productive labor. They employed a natural division of labor based on sex
and age. Men went out to hunt, old men made tools, and women harvested
plants, managed household chores, and engaged in primitive agriculture.
Children helped women do auxiliary labor. Interpersonal relations were
primitive cooperative relations.

Under the conditions of clan commune ownership and collective labor,
products were shared equally. Because of the low level of productive
forces at that time, products obtained through labor were only
sufficient to maintain a minimum level of subsistence with little left
over. If distribution had not been equal, some members of the clan would
have starved, or the clan might have disintegrated.

The economic substructure of the primitive society also produced its
corresponding superstructure. The primitive society successively passed
through the matriarchal and patriarchal clan stages. The formation of
the matriarchal clan was the result of the more important positions
occupied by women in productive activities. At that time, women were
mainly occupied with primitive agriculture, and men with hunting. But
hunting was more seasonal, and its results chancy. Agriculture was a
more reliable source of means of livelihood. Therefore, social life
evolved around the female. With the development of productive forces,
agriculture advanced from its primitive form and animal husbandry was
separated from agriculture. Men's importance in productive activities
was elevated. With the transition from group marriages
centering around women to one-to-one marriages, women's positions were
rendered more subordinate, ushering in the patriarchal clan.

The clan council, composed of all the adult members of the clan, was the
highest power organ in the clan commune. The clan council elected the
clan chief and wartime military leaders and deliberated and decided on
all important matters. \[Lewis H.\] Morgan, an American scholar,
described in his _Ancient Society_ the clan commune of the
American Indians as follows: "All members were free persons and were
obliged to protect each other's freedom. Everybody had equal rights. Not
even the clan chief and military leaders could ask for any preferential
privilege. They were compatriots based on blood relations." This
superstructure of the clan was instrumental in consolidating and
developing the clan economic substructure and in advancing the
productive forces at that time.

Chairman Mao points out: 'The development of the Chinese people (here
with reference mainly to the Han people) was similar to other peoples in
the world. They passed through many tens of thousands of years in a
classless, primitive society."
<a id="4">[[4]](#bot_4)</a> The society connected
with the "Peking Man" which was discovered in Chou-k'ou-tien suburb of
Peking represented the earliest stage of China's primitive society. Many
old sites and cultural relics from primitive societies discovered in
many areas of China prove that matriarchal clan tribes once existed in
the central region along the Yellow River basin and extended to Inner
Mongolia, Heilungkiang, Sinkiang, Tibet, Kwangsi, Szechuan, and Yunnan.
About five thousand years ago, tribes along the Yellow River and Yangtze
River basins gradually became patriarchal clan communes. Before the Hsia
dynasty in China, the primitive society existed for several hundred
thousand years.

Historical facts tell us that the primitive society had no private
property, no classes, no class exploitation, or class oppression. They
strongly refute the fallacy that private property and classes have been
with us from time immemorial.

### _The Emergence of Private Property Led to the Collapse of the Primitive Commune_

In the course of development in the primitive society, with the
development of productive forces, social division of labor arose. In the
beginning, animal husbandry was separated from agriculture. Some tribes
specialized in animal husbandry. Other tribes specialized in
agriculture. This was the first major social division of labor. Later
on, handicraft activities were separated from agriculture. This was the
second major division of labor. Toward the end of the primitive society,
iron was discovered. The appearance of iron symbolized the advancement
of human society to a higher stage. But it also heralded the collapse of
the primitive society. With the separate appearance of agriculture,
animal husbandry, and handicraft activities, production for the purpose
of exchange, namely commodity production, appeared.

With the continual development of productive forces, some surplus was
available after the maintenance of a basic level of subsistence. The two
major divisions of labor increased labor productivity and promoted the
development of agriculture, animal husbandry, and handicraft activities.
Surplus products and social wealth increased. Under these conditions,
the possibility of some people expropriating the labor products of other
people occurred. On the other hand, with the expansion of exchange, the
possibility of the clan chief gradually converting commune property into
his own private property also arose. The use of metal tools ---
especially iron axes, iron hoes, and iron plows --- markedly increased
labor productivity and created conditions for production on an
individual household basis. The original collective production based on
the clan gradually dissolved into individual production based on the
household. Production changed from a collective to a private matter.
Means of production and products also became private property. Then,
land formerly collectively owned but assigned to individual households
also passed into private hands. Private ownership appeared and the
primitive commune disintegrated.

With the emergence of private ownership, inequality in the
distribution of property among families arose. The clan chiefs
continuously used their power to convert collective property into their
private property and became the wealthiest households in the clan. At
the same time, as the wealth of these rich families increased and their
scope of operation expanded, labor shortages were experienced. On the
other hand, with the development of productive forces, the use of slave
labor became possible and profitable. As a result, prisoners of war were
no longer slaughtered but were converted into slaves. Later on, some
poor people of the clan also became slaves of the rich families. The
exploitation of people by people emerged.

With the development of production and the expansion of exchange, the
third major division of labor occurred. There arose merchants who
specialized in commodity exchange. With the development of commodity
exchange, money came into being. With the appearance of money, the rich
families engaged in usury and accelerated the concentration and uneven
distribution of wealth. As a result, wealth rapidly became concentrated
in the hands of a few slave owners. On the other hand, the broad
laboring masses were forced into slavery by poverty and bankruptcy,
rapidly swelling the ranks of the slaves. Thus, society was separated
into classes: the slave owners and the slaves. These two opposing
classes made their first appearance in human history. With the
appearance of classes, the former clan council evolved from being
society 's public servant into being its master and became a tool by
which the slave owners oppressed the slaves. The state --- the machinery
for the oppression of one class by another class --- was born at that
time. From that time up to the present, "all social history has been the
history of class struggle."
<a id="5">[[5]](#bot_5)</a>

[Slavery Was the Earliest System of Exploitation](#)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _The Characteristic of Production Relations in the Slave Society Was the Ownership of the Means of Production and of Slaves by the Slave Owner_

In the slave society, the slave owner not only owned the means
of production, but also slaves. The slave was merely a
living tool under the absolute domination of the slave owner. The slave
was not only exploited, he was treated as an animal, a sacrificial
object, and a commodity. He could even be slaughtered by his owner.
Slave labor was overt forced labor. The slave owner used brute force to
make the slave work and indiscriminately tortured his slaves. To make it
easier to catch runaway slaves, the slave owners even branded slaves and
put them in fetters. The slave owner used the cruelest means to extract
surplus labor and products from the slave. All products produced by the
slave belonged to the slave owner. The slave was fed like an animal,
just enough to keep him alive. This, then, was the production relation
of the slave society.

Chairman Mao points out, "About four thousand years have elapsed between
the present and the time when the primitive society of the Chinese
nation disintegrated into a class society, passing through the slave
society and the feudal society."
<a id="6">[[6]](#bot_6)</a> China developed into a
slave society after the Hsia dynasty. In the Yin dynasty,
"[chung-jen]" and "[hsü-min]"\["&A" and "HR":
the "masses"\] were all slaves. Clay burial figures unearthed in Yin-hsü
(the abandoned site of the capital of the Yin dynasty, in the vicinity
of Hsiao-t'un-ts'un, An-yang, Honan Province) all had handcuffs. The
male figures were cuffed with their hands behind them, and the females
in front. These were reflections of slave lives at that time. The
slaughter of slaves was even more hair-raising. The slave owner often
sacrificed his slaves in sacrificial ceremonies. In some ceremonies
during the Yin dynasty, more than a thousand people were killed. From
the tombs of slave owners in the Yin dynasty, slaves were found buried
alive or dead. They ranged from more than ten to several hundreds. Among
them were both males and females, even children. There is no doubt that
the slave society existed in China.

But, Trotskyites like Ch'en Po-ta spread the fallacy that there was no
slave society in China in a vain attempt to negate the universal truth
of Marxist classification of human societies and to create evidence for
their fallacy that communism was not suited to Chinese
conditions. This is reactionary in the extreme and utterly futile.

### _Class Antagonism Led to the Opposition between Urban and Rural Areas and between Mental and Physical Labor_

The earliest ancient city appeared at the end of the primitive society
and was established at the central region of the tribal alliance for the
purpose of defense. After the formation of the slave society and with
the development of agriculture, handicraft industry, and commodity
exchange, the opposition between the city and the countryside arose.

At that time, industrial products were handicraft products. The city was
the center of the handicraft industry. The development of the handicraft
industry was related to the development of commerce. Therefore, the city
was also the center of commercial activities. In China's Yin dynasty,
commerce developed rapidly. Commercial cities emerged. Yin and Shang
\[[shang] is the Chinese term for commerce\] are synonymous,
and the Yin dynasty is also known as the Shang dynasty. Present-day
Yin-hsü was the site of a fairly large commercial city in the Yin
dynasty.

The slave owner established a superstructure corresponding to the
economic substructure of the slave society, and the city became the
political center of the slave society. The slave owner paid special
attention to strengthening the state machinery in the city to suppress
the rebellion of slaves. Many slave owners, big merchants, usurers, and
bureaucrats were concentrated in the city, leading evil and extravagant
lives. To satisfy their needs for recreation, the slave owner forced the
slaves to build beautiful palaces, temples, theaters, and other public
places. The city thus gradually developed into the cultural center of
the slave society.

Thus, the city in the slave society assumed a dominating economic,
political, and ideological role and created opposition between the city
and the countryside. The opposition between the city and the
countryside was a product of acute class contradictions. It was
characterized by urban exploitation of the countryside.

In the primitive society, all able-bodied people participated in labor.
There was no specialization in mental labor. In the slave society, the
situation was different. As a result of a large quantity of surplus
products created by slave labor, it was possible for the slave owners to
divorce themselves from production labor. At that time, the division
between mental and physical labor was necessary and possible. This
division between mental and physical labor was antagonistic right from
the start. It was the privilege of the slave-owning class to enjoy
cultural education. "The class controlling the means of material
production also controlled the means of mental production. Therefore,
the thinking of those without means of mental production was generally
under the influence of the ruling class."
<a id="7">[[7]](#bot_7)</a> The slave-owning class
tried its best to spread the fallacy that "the mental workers rule
others while the physical laborers are ruled by others." It used to its
best advantage its politics, law, philosophy, and ideology as tools to
rule the slaves and other laboring masses for the consolidation of the
dictatorship of the slave owner.

### _The Rebellion of Slaves Hastened the Collapse of Slavery_

Slavery was an inevitable stage in human history. Its appearance met the
needs of existing productive forces. Under slavery, prisoners of war
were no longer slaughtered en masse. They were instead kept alive to
work. This was helpful to the development of production. Because the
slave owner possessed large amounts of means of production and labor, it
was possible to organize production and cooperation on a large scale.
With the use of metal tools, agriculture, animal husbandry, and
handicraft industry developed rapidly. Agriculture became the most
important component of the national economy. The horse, buffalo, sheep,
chicken, dog and pig were domesticated. By means of
cooperative efforts among a large number of handicraftsmen, a bronze
ritual vessel \[[ssu-mu-mao ta fang ting]\] measuring 110
centimeters in horizontal length, 77 centimeters in width, 137
centimeters in height, and weighing 1,400 market catties, was cast with
fine floral designs. From it we can infer the high production skills and
workmanship already reached at that time.

The production relations of the slave society promoted the development
of productive forces to a certain extent. But these production relations
embodied inherent contradictions to the further development of
productive forces. These contradictions became more acute as productive
forces developed. The broad masses of slaves could not bear the cruel
exploitation and oppression of the slave owner any longer. They slowed
their work, ran away in large numbers, and purposely wrecked production
tools. On the one hand, the slave owners increased their oppression,
leadingto massive early death of slaves. On the other hand, they
substituted heavy tools not easily subject to abuse. But the development
of productive forces was thus restricted. The restriction on the
development of productive forces also resulted from the contempt toward
physical labor generated by the system. Bankrupt small producers
preferred to wander around than to engage in physical labor. These
things all showed that the production relations of slavery were already
ill-suited to the development of productive forces. Its extinction was
as inevitable as its emergence.

At the end of the slave society, feudal production relations appeared.
The ownership of land by the slave state was the basis of the production
relations in the slave society. In the Yin-Chou period of China, state
ownership of land was in the form of [ching-t'ien] \[well
fields\]. All land within the confines of [ching-t'ien] was
called "communal land." These "communal lands" and the slaves were at
the disposal of the biggest slave owners --- the feudal princes, nobles,
and state officials appointed by the Son of Heaven. With the development
of productive forces, some slave owners tried their best to force the
slaves to bring under cultivation large amounts of "private land" so as
to exploit more surplus labor. With the expansion of
"private land," the system of "communal land" was undermined. At this
time, the landlord class emerged. They championed the "abolition of
[ching-t'ien] and the demolition of raised paths between
fields \[used as boundaries\]." Slaves gradually became serfs. The
sprouts of feudal production relations flourished.

The basic classes of the slave society were the slave-owning class and
the slaves. Outside of these two classes were the free peasants and
handicraftsmen. Slaves were at the bottom of the social strata and were
subject to the cruelest exploitation and oppression by the slave owners.
All through the whole period of slavery, there was violent class
struggle between the slaves and the slave owners. The Spring and Autumn
period of China saw the transition from slavery to feudalism. A slave
leader named Chih led 9,000 people rampaging across the land and
invadingthe feudal lords. Slave rebellions seriously challenged the rule
of the slave-owning class. In various countries of the world, slave
uprisings were the theme of many heroic epics. For example, in the Roman
period, Spartacus led the biggest rebellion with 120,000 participants.
This rebellion shook the whole Roman Empire to its foundation. Violent
slave rebellions dealt severe blows to the political power of the slave
owners and hastened the collapse of slavery. While slavery
disintegrated, feudal production relations gradually matured. The newly
emerging landlords representing feudal production relations used the
power of the laboring people to overthrow the rule of the slave owners
and established a government of landlords. Feudalism finally replaced
slavery.

The replacement of slavery by feudalism was historically inevitable. In
China, during the time of the great epoch-making social changes,
Confucius, the reactionary proponent of the slave system, obstinately
opposed any social reforms and regarded the changes in production
relations as "great evils." He resolutely opposed all the reform
measures carried out by the new feudal lords, advocated the restoration
of the old slave system, and hoped in vain to save the tottering social
order. But it was all over. His efforts represented the futile struggle
of a dying cause.

[Feudalism Is Another Exploitative System Based on Class Conflicts](#)</a>
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _Feudal Landowner ship Is the Economic Substructure of the Feudal Society_

The production relations of the feudal society were based on
landownership by the landlord class and their almost complete control of
serfs. The landlord owned most of the land. The peasants and serfs owned
little or no land. They had to depend on farming the landlord's land for
a living. This way, they were fettered by the feudal land system. They
lost their personal freedom and were subject to the landlord's cruel
exploitation and oppression.

The chief means by which the landlord exploited the peasants was through
the collection of feudal rent from land rented to them. There were three
kinds of feudal rents: labor rent, rent in kind, and money rent.

Labor rent was prevalent in the early period of the feudal society.
Labor rent consisted of the peasants using their own tools and working
on the landlord-operated land at specified times. The peasants could
work on their land only after working for the landlord. Under this type
of land rent, the relations between the exploiter and the exploited were
quite clear-cut. The produce from the land operated by the peasants
belonged to them. They were thus interested in the labor performed on
it. The produce from the labor performed by the peasants on the land
operated by the landlord belonged wholly to the landlord. The peasants
were naturally not enthusiastic about such labor. The landlord was well
aware of this difference in attitude. To make the peasants work hard on
the land operated by the landlord, the latter kept a number of foremen
to enforce strict discipline. Therefore, under such a rent system, the
relations between the oppressor and the oppressed, the ruling and ruled,
were quite obvious. In the early period of feudalism, productive forces
were quite weak. The landlord could not have expropriated the surplus
labor of the peasants if he had not relied on direct
coercion. This kind of feudal rent met with violent resistance from the
peasants.

Later, under the impetus of the development of productive forces and out
of a desire for greater exploitation and less visibility of their
exploitative intent, the landlord adopted rent in kind in place of labor
rent. Under rent in kind, the peasant no longer worked under the
supervision of the landlord. He did not have to work on the land
operated by the landlord. The peasant could control all his labor. But
he had to turn in surplus produce in kind to the landlord at specified
intervals. Compared with labor rent, rent in kind was instrumental in
improving know-how and labor productivity to some extent. But rent in
kind often represented 50 percent or even 70 to 80 percent of the
peasants' harvests. To maintain a minimum level of subsistence, the
peasants had to extend their working hours and raise their labor
intensity. Even so, the peasants were unable to lead a life very far
above extreme poverty.

Money rent appeared in late feudal society. Productive forces were then
much higher than before. The relations between money and commodities
were widely developed. To satisfy his manifold needs for a luxurious and
extravagant life, the landlord needed ever more money. Under such
conditions, money rent appeared. Under money rent, the peasants sold
their produce in the market in exchange for money to pay rent. Thus the
peasants were not only exploited by the landlord, but also by merchant
middlemen. When harvests were good, the merchants depressed prices to
squeeze every drop of sweat and blood from the peasants. As a result,
the peasants' livelihood was even more pitiable, and they were
frequently at the brink of bankruptcy.

In the feudal society, the broad masses of peasants were under the
exploitation of feudal rent. They also had to pay heavy taxes to the
feudal state and were subject to the exploitation of usurers. The
landlord colluded with the bureaucrats and the army to plunder the
peasants' land, steal their wealth, and force them to engage in
involuntary unpaid labor. The broad masses of peasants were subject to
all sorts of extraeconomic exploitation.

### _Peasant Rebellions Reflected the Increasingly Acute Class Contradictions in the Feudal Society_

The replacement of the slave society by the feudal society was a step
forward in history. The feudal production relations were conducive to
promoting productive forces in the early stage of feudal society.
Agricultural production techniques were elevated, and tools improved.
The applications of iron instruments to production were disseminated,
both the variety and quantity of crops were increased, and handicraft
industry was thriving. In the Warring States period of China, largescale
water conservancy projects, such as the Tu-chiang Dike in Szechuan
Province, were constructed. Through additional construction and
maintenance during various dynasties, Tu-chiang Dike still serves a very
useful purpose at present. Salt baking, metallurgy, silk goods, spinning
and weaving, porcelain and pottery, and embroidery were quite well
developed in China's feudal society. The compass, gunpowder, paper, and
block printing were invented very early.

However, production under feudal production relations was basically
small-scale production on a household basis. This small-scale production
was not conducive to the further development of productive forces. The
broad masses of peasants under feudal production relations were
especially subject to cruel exploitation and oppression with little
possibility for developing production. The contradictions between feudal
production relations and productive forces were reflected as class
contradictions between the landlord and the peasant. This was the major
contradiction in feudal society. The highest manifestation of this
contradiction was armed rebellion by the broad masses of peasants to
resist the rule of the landlord. These rebellions and struggles were
characteristic of the whole feudal period. About 200 B.C., soon after
Ch'in Shih-huang unified China and established the first feudal
dictatorship, the first great peasant rebellion in China's history
exploded --- the rebellion led by Ch'en Sheng and Wu Kuang. After that,
during the more than two thousand years before the Taiping Rebellion in
the mid-nineteenth century, several hundred small and large
peasant rebellions and peasant revolutionary wars were recorded. The
size and number of peasant uprisings in Chinese history broke world
records. "Only these peasant class struggles, peasant rebellions, and
peasant wars were the real motive force of historical development.
Because every major peasant rebellion and peasant war dealt blows to the
contemporary feudal rule, they thus promoted the development of social
productive forces to some extent."
<a id="8">[[8]](#bot_8)</a> However, renegades
like Ch'en Po-ta attributed the development of social productive forces
to the "concessions" made by the feudal ruling class. This runs counter
to historical facts. In history, the landlords never made concessions to
peasant rebellions. They always resorted to bloodthirsty suppression,
counterattacks, and trickery, but never to "concessions." Renegade Ch'en
Po-ta's theory about "concessions" was purely an attempt to beautify the
landlords.

### _The Development of a Commodity Economy and Primitive Accumulation Gave Birth to and Promoted Capitalist Production Relations_

In the late feudal period, with the further development of a commodity
economy, capitalist production relations arose.

Simple commodity production in the feudal society was based on private
ownership and individual labor. The purpose of production was exchange.
Small commodity producers had to sell their products in the market. But
because every commodity producer had different production conditions,
skills, and labor intensity, labor spent on each type of commodity
varied. On the other hand, similar commodities were sold at the same
price. This constituted a contradiction. With the development of this
contradiction, a small number of small commodity producers with better
conditions prospered. But the majority of small commodity producers with
poorer production conditions were increasingly impoverished. Thus, the
simple commodity producers were polarized.

In the feudal society, craft guilds were often formed to prevent
competition among handicraftsmen in the same line or from
handicraftsmen from other areas or lines. Members of the guilds had to
obey guild regulations. In the handicraft guild, there were the master,
journeyman, and apprentice. The relations between the master and the
journeyman and apprentice were basically feudal with slight
exploitation. These guilds limited the polarization among the small
commodity producers. But with the development of a commodity economy,
some comparatively prosperous masters were unwilling to obey the guild
regulations. They indiscriminately increased the number of journeymen
and apprentices, lengthened their labor time, improved production
techniques, and gradually converted their journeymen and apprentices
into hired hands. Other bankrupt masters, journeymen, and apprentices
gradually joined the ranks of hired hands. On the basis of polarization,
there gradually appeared the capitalist relations of employment.

In the process of polarization among the small commodity producers and
the emergence of capitalist production relations, commercial capital
played an important role. The merchant was originally the middleman in
commodity exchange. Later he became a contract merchant who contracted
to sell the products of the commodity producers. He later supplied raw
materials and even tools to the small producers who were to produce
products at specified times and of a certain quality, quantity, type,
and specification. Thus, the small commodity producer was entirely
controlled by the merchant and became a hired hand. And the merchant
himself became an industrial capitalist.

In the countryside, during the period of late feudal society, because of
the development of a commodity economy, the landlord class gradually
converted to money rents. This daily increased the peasants' dependence
on markets and hastened their polarization. The majority of peasants
went bankrupt and degenerated into hired farm hands. A few elevated
themselves to become rich peasants and later agricultural capitalists.

Thus, capitalist production relations gradually established themselves
in feudal society. In China's late feudal society, with the development
of a commodity economy, the seeds of capitalist production
relations were about to sprout. Without the influence of foreign
capitalism, China was gradually to develop into a capitalist society.

The establishment of capitalist production relations in feudal society
was closely related to the development of productive forces. In the
beginning, the small workshops of the handicraftsmen became large
capitalist workshops. In these workshops, hand labor was still the rule.
But with many workers working together under unified capitalist command,
simple cooperation was possible, forming a new productive force. Later,
capitalist simple cooperation developed into capitalist factory
handicraft industry. The characteristic of the factory handicraft
industry was division of labor among workers producing the same
commodity with each specializing in one process. It simplified labor
processes and improved labor productivity by intensifying labor input.
It also created the conditions for the substitution of machine operation
for hand operation.

The development of capitalist production relations depended on two basic
conditions: First, there had to be a large body of proletariat who could
freely sell their labor. Second, there had to be a prior accumulation of
a large amount of pecuniary wealth. To facilitate the development of
capitalist production relations, the bourgeoisie used violence to create
these two conditions. Therefore, in the development of capitalism, there
was a process of primitive accumulation.

An important method of primitive accumulation was exploitation of the
peasant. England, where capitalist production relations first developed,
was a typical example. During the more than three hundred years from the
1470s until the early nineteenth century, the English ruling class
launched the "enclosure" movement by forcibly taking land from the
peasants. The modern industry of England started from wool textiles. The
wool textile industry required a large amount of wool, thus forcing up
its price. The big landlords and farm operators enclosed land wherever
they could to raise sheep to cash in on the fortune. They forcibly
evicted peasants from their land, demolished and burned down their
houses, and expropriated large amounts of means of
production and means of livelihood. The enclosure movement forced a
large number of peasants to leave their native places and wander far
afield begging for their livelihood. Following this, the English ruling
class promulgated various bloodstained legislation to forbid the
peasants from drifting and force them to accept hired employment under
harsh conditions.

The plundering of pecuniary wealth was another important method of
primitive accumulation. The European bourgeoisie resorted to armed
invasions of Asia, Africa, America, and Australia to establish the
colonial system. They launched commercial warfare and plundered the
colonies' material resources and pecuniary wealth in order to amass
capital for the establishment of large-scale capitalist production.

Therefore, the process of primitive accumulation was the process of
forcing the separation of the direct producers from their means of
production and concentrating pecuniary wealth in the hands of the
capitalists as capital. Marx penetratingly pointed out, "This history of
expropriation (of the direct producers by the bourgeoisie) was written
with blood and fire into the human chronology."
<a id="9">[[9]](#bot_9)</a> The process of
primitive accumulation vividly demonstrated that the capitalists did not
"start from scratch," but depended entirely on plundering. "Capital
comes dripping from head to foot, from every pore, with blood and dirt."
<a id="10">[[10]](#bot_10)</a>

### _Bourgeois Revolution Declared the Collapse of Feudalism_

The birth and development of capitalist production relations in feudal
society was severely restricted by feudal production relations and their
superstructure. They were prevented from assuming a dominating role in
feudal society because the feudal ruling class would never willingly
retire from the historical stage. They inevitably used the state
machinery in their control to protect the outdated feudal system. The
bourgeoisie and the intellectuals representing capitalist production
relations publicized capitalist production relations as
"manifestations of eternity and rationality" and "an eternal law of
Nature." They championed so-called "freedom, equality, and universal
love" and denounced feudalism in their efforts to prepare public opinion
for the bourgeois revolution to overthrow feudalism. In the bourgeois
revolution, the major class forces were the peasants, the proletariat,
and the bourgeoisie. The peasants were the major force, but not the
representatives of the new productive forces. The proletariat had not
formed its independent political force, so the bourgeoisie assumed the
leadership of the bourgeois revolution.

In old China, because it was a semifeudal and semicolonial society, the
bourgeoisie was divided into two parts. One was the bureaucratic
bourgeoisie. It depended on imperialism. Along with the landlords, its
members represented the most backward and most reactionary production
relations. They were the targets of the Chinese bourgeois democratic
revolution. The second part was the national bourgeoisie. It was subject
to the oppression and restriction of imperialism and feudalism on the
one hand but was also closely related to them on the other. This
determined that the national bourgeoisie was a force on the side of
democratic revolution under some conditions. But it was also weak and
unstable. Therefore, "it was determined historically that the task of
anti-imperialist and antifeudal bourgeois democratic revolution could
not be completed by bourgeois leadership, but only by proletarian
leadership." <a id="11">[[11]](#bot_11)</a>

Although the bourgeois revolution was a revolution in which one form of
exploitation replaced another, this revolution also had its reversals.
In the course of the revolution, there were acute class struggles
involving attempted restorations by the feudal class and opposition to
restorations by the bourgeoisie. England started its bourgeois
revolution in 1640. Not until after two internal wars was Charles I, a
representative of the Stuarts, executed. In 1660, Charles II, another
representative of the Stuarts, again attempted restoration. In 1688, the
English bourgeoisie invited the Prince of Orange (William III)
from Holland to overthrow the Stuart House. Only then was
the bourgeois dictatorship stabilized. In France, in the eighty-six
years from 1789 when the bourgeois revolution exploded until 1875 when
the Third Republic was formed, advances were mixed with retreats,
republics with monarchies, revolutionary terror with antirevolutionary
terror, internal with external wars, conquests of with conquests by
foreign countries, without a moment Of peace and stability. Even so,
because the feudal system was rotten, it still could not escape its
extinction no matter how hard it tried to struggle. The replacement of
feudalism by capitalism was inevitable.

### _Major Study References_

Marx and Engels, _Communist Manifesto_.

Engels, _The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the
State_.

Chairman Mao, "The Analysis of Chinese Social Classes."

Chairman Mao, "The Chinese Revolution and the Chinese Communist Party,"
Chapter 1.

### _Review Problems_

1\. How did private ownership, classes, and the state arise?

2\. How did the contradictions between production relations and
productive forces in the slave society and the feudal society manifest
themselves in class struggle?

3\. What were the major conditions for the birth and development of
capitalist production relations?

_Notes_
-------------------

<a id="bot_s_a">[\*](#s_a)</a> Tzu-pen-chu-i i-ch'ien ti she-hui ching-chi
chih-tu --- yuanshih she-hui, nu-li she-hui ho feng-chien she-hui ti
shengch'an kuan-hsi.

<a id="bot_1">[[1]](#1)</a> Engels, "The Role of Labor in the
Transformation of Apes into Man," _Complete Works of Marx and
Engels_, Vol. 3, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 508.

<a id="bot_2">[[2]](#2)</a> Engels, _Anti-Duhring_, _Selected
Works of Marx and Engels_, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p.
154.

<a id="bot_3">[[3]](#3)</a> "On Practice," _Selected Works of
Mao Tse-tung_, Vol. 1, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 260.

<a id="bot_4">[[4]](#4)</a> "The Chinese Revolution and the Chinese
Communist Party," _Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung_, Vol. 2,
Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 585.

<a id="bot_5">[[5]](#5)</a> _Communist Manifesto_, _Selected
Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 1, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she,
1972, p. 250.

<a id="bot_6">[[6]](#6)</a> "The Chinese Revolution and the Chinese
Communist Party," _Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung_, Vol. 2,
Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 585.

<a id="bot_7">[[7]](#7)</a> _The German Ideology_, _Selected
Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 1, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she,
1972, p. 52.

<a id="bot_8">[[8]](#8)</a> "The Chinese Revolution and the Chinese
Communist Party," _Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung_, Vol. 2,
Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 588.

<a id="bot_9">[[9]](#9)</a> Marx, _Capital_, Vol. 1,
_Complete Works of Marx and Engels_, Vol. 23, p. 783.

<a id="bot_10">[[10]](#10)</a> Ibid., p. 829.

<a id="bot_11">[[11]](#11)</a> "The Task of the Chinese Communist Party in
the Anti-Japanese Period," _Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung_,
Vol. 1, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 241.
