[*22* Mutual Aid and Exchange](#) 
====================================================================

[The External Economic Relations of the Socialist
State](#)<a id="s_a">[\*](#bot_s_a)</a>

Our time is one of imperialism and proletarian revolution. When the
proletariat has seized political power and established socialism in one
or several countries, certain economic interrelations inevitably arise
among socialist countries, between socialist states and other states
that have gained their national independence, and between the socialist
states and the imperialist and capitalist countries. The external
economic relations of the socialist state are closely related to
socialist economic construction at home and to international situations.
We must know something about the socialist state's external economic
relations.

[External Economic Relations Are a Component of the Socialist State's Foreign Relations](#)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _External Economic Relations Must Obey the Proletarian Revolutionary Diplomatic Line_

After the October Revolution, Lenin pointed out repeatedly that the
socialist state under proletarian dictatorship was the base from which
to advance the proletarian world revolution. The state
which first achieved a socialist victory must raise high the combat
banners "The proletariat of the world, unite!" and "The proletariat and
the oppressed nations of the world, unite!" It must strengthen its
solidarity with the proletariat, the oppressed peoples, and the
oppressed nations of the whole world and strengthen its solidarity with
all countries which are victims of imperialist aggression, sabotage,
interference, control, and bullying in order to form an extensive united
front to oppose imperialism and new and old colonialism.

The fundamental principle of the foreign relations of the socialist
state is firm adherence to proletarian internationalism. China's
revolutionary diplomatic line is: To develop a relationship of mutual
cooperation with socialist countries under the principle of proletarian
internationalism; to support the revolutionary struggles of all
oppressed peoples and nations; to work for peaceful coexistence with
countries under different social systems on the basis of mutual respect
for territorial integrity and sovereignty, nonaggression,
noninterference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual
benefit, and peaceful coexistence; to oppose imperialist policies of
aggression and wars; and to oppose the power politics and hegemony of
the superpowers. This is a Marxist line. It is consistent with the basic
interests of our people and also with those of the world's people.

The external economic relations of the socialist state are components of
the external relations of the socialist state. These relations must be
conducted under the guidance of the revolutionary diplomatic line.
Therefore, in its handling of external economic relations, the first
thing the socialist state always does is actively develop relations of
friendship and cooperation among the socialist countries and between the
socialist countries and the nationalist countries. It handles
international economic relations on the basis of the five principles of
peaceful coexistence. Whatever the form of economic aid, the sovereignty
of the recipient countries must be strictly respected. No strings should
be attached, no privileges should be requested. It must be genuine
assistance to the recipient countries for their development
of independent national economies. International trade should be
developed on the basis of equality and mutual benefit. Economic
development should be promoted on a mutual basis, according to mutual
needs and possibilities and with mutual respect for each other's
sovereignty and aspirations.

### _In Handling External Economic Relations We Must Treat Each Case Distinctively according to the Particular Situation_

In handling external economic relations, the socialist state must treat
each case distinctively according to the social system of each country.

The relations among the socialist countries are the newest international
relations in human history. The socialist countries use Marxism and
internationalism as their common ideological basis. They adopt
proletarian dictatorship as their common economic basis and regard the
building of socialism and the realization of the great ideal of
communism as their common goal of struggle. Chairman Mao pointed out:
"Since the beginning of history no relations between countries have
resembled those between the socialist states, which share their ups and
downs, trust and respect each other, and assist and support each other.
This is because the socialist state is a new form of state. It is a
state which has overthrown the exploitative class and in which the
laboring people are in power. In the interrelations among these states,
the principle of unifying internationalism and nationalism is realized.
Common interests and common ideals have bound us closely together."
<a id="1">[[1]](#bot_1)</a>

The firm adherence to the principle of proletarian internationalism and
the mutual economic assistance and support among the socialist states
have immense significance in accelerating the building of socialism and
in increasing the strength to oppose imperialism and social imperialism
in various countries.

Although the social systems of the socialist states and the
nationalist states may differ, they have both suffered
imperialist aggression. They have a common desire to protect national
independence and to oppose the imperialist policy of aggression and wars
and the hegemony of the superpowers. Therefore, the socialist states and
the nationalist states can establish and develop relations of friendship
and cooperation under the banner of opposition to imperialism and to new
and old colonialism and on the basis of the five principles of peaceful
coexistence. The aid provided by the socialist states to assist the
nationalist states of Asia, Africa, and Latin America in developing
their national economies is instrumental in opposing the two superpowers
and their lackeys, protecting the national independence and sovereignty
of various countries, and promoting the progressive enterprise of
mankind.

"As for the imperialist countries, we should unite with their peoples
and strive to coexist peacefully with those countries, do business with
them and prevent any possible war, but under no circumstances should we
harbor any unrealistic notions about them."
<a id="2">[[2]](#bot_2)</a> Only by firmly
adhering to independence and self-reliance and unfolding an acute
struggle with them can these countries be forced to agree within a
certain time period to the establishment of some degree of peaceful
coexistence and the development of trade and the organization of
associations and exchanges among the people.

### _The Essence of Soviet Revisionist External Economic Relations Is Overseas Aggression and Expansion_

Lenin pointed out: "World hegemony is the content of imperialist
policy." <a id="3">[[3]](#bot_3)</a> To conceal
its criminal intention of fighting for world hegemony, Soviet
revisionist social imperialism always hides under the cloak of
"socialism" in its external economic relations. It is, therefore, even
more deceitful and dangerous than standard imperialism. Stripped of its
cloak, what stands before the people is a ferocious devil.

The main external economic activity of Soviet revisionism is the sale of
armaments. These are the most profitable transactions. From
its entrance into the world arms market in 1955 until 1972, its
accumulated sales of arms amounted to \$28.5 billion. In the beginning
of the 1970s, arms sales by Soviet revisionism represented 37.5 percent
of the world arms sales. It had surpassed the United States and had
become one of the world's biggest arms dealers. Especially in recent
years, Soviet revisionism has stepped up its expansion of arms
transactions to obtain windfall profits. They are a bunch of old hands
at fishing in troubled waters and making war profits. During the Middle
East War, the arms sold by Soviet revisionism to the Arab countries were
priced very high. They had to be paid for in liquid foreign exchanges.
In order to buy some arms to protect themselves against Israeli
aggression, some countries had to borrow dollars in the Western money
market to pay these Soviet revisionist arms dealers. [Call],
a periodical published by Asian and African writers, put it nicely:
"Through their own prolonged and painful experience, the Arab people
finally realize this fact: Soviet social imperialism is an enemy
disguised as a 'friend.' This type of enemy is even more dangerous than
an open enemy."

The foreign trade and so-called economic aid of Soviet revisionism are
also tools for aggression and expansion used by the new czars. They not
only resort to such shameful practices as buying cheap and selling dear,
substituting inferior goods for regular goods, pushing unsalable goods,
and all sorts of manipulation and speculation, but also adopt coercive
measures to force other countries to trade only with them. When some
"fraternal countries" want to free themselves from the control of Soviet
revisionism and trade with the Western countries, Soviet revisionism
resorts to threats. In September 1972, an attache' in the Soviet
revisionist embassy in Czechoslovakia was ordered to publish a public
speech in the [Freedom Daily] \[Tzuyu pao\]. He assailed
"some (Czech) plants and enterprises" for "often buying some products
from the West" and for "only exploring possibilities for the import of
machines and equipment from the capitalist countries." He said
threateningly, "We hope our partners in the socialist states understand
that if their domestic markets are not open to the machines
and equipment of the Soviet Union, then the Soviet Union will not be
able to develop further our economic relations because our supply
capacity of fuels and raw materials is limited." This is the countenance
of a rascal. However, from 1964 to 1971, Soviet revisionism's imports
from eleven Western countries increased by more than 61 percent, of
which the majority were machines and equipment. This is simply a case of
"only the state governor can set fires while the people are not allowed
even to light their lamps." This is the "partnership" that Soviet
revisionism wants to establish.

In its external economic relations, Soviet revisionism says all the nice
things and does all the bad things. No matter how smooth their talk is
and how attractive their outer garments look, the results of their
external aggression and expansion can only meet ever greater resistance
from the people of the various countries subject to their control,
enslavement, and exploitation. The external aggression and plunder of
Soviet revisionist social imperialism are like taking up a rock to hit
one's own feet. They will only hasten its end.

[External Economic Aid Given by the Socialist State Is an Internationalist Obligation](#)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _The Revolutionary Struggle of the People of the World Is Mutually Supporting and Mutually Assisting_

The proletarian revolutionary enterprise has always been an
international enterprise. The revolutionary struggles of the proletariat
in various countries are components of the proletarian world revolution.

A country's victory in its socialist revolution and socialist
construction cannot be separated from the support provided by the
proletariat and the revolutionary peoples of the whole world. In our
revolutionary struggle and in our socialist revolution and socialist
construction, our people have been consistently supported and assisted
by the proletariat and revolutionary people of the world. Chairman Mao
pointed out, "Without the various forms of aid from the
international revolutionary forces, it would not be possible to achieve
victory; nor would it be possible to consolidate after the victory."
<a id="4">[[4]](#bot_4)</a> The proletariat
must liberate not only itself, but also the whole of mankind. If the
whole of mankind cannot be liberated, the proletariat itself cannot be
ultimately liberated either. Therefore, those countries in which the
proletariat has already seized power should not only support the just
struggles of the proletariat, the oppressed peoples, and the oppressed
nations of the whole world politically and morally, but should also
assist them with material aid. This is an internationalist obligation
that should be fulfilled by every socialist country.

Whether or not the proletarian internationalist principle is firmly
upheld and whether or not the proletarian internationalist obligation is
fulfilled have always been a focal point in the struggles between
Marxism and revisionism. All revisionists oppose proletarian
internationalism. What they worship are bourgeois chauvinism and
national self-interest. In the resolute struggles with the renegades of
the Second International, Lenin defended and developed the proletarian
internationalist principle. He pointed out, "Proletarian
internationalism requires that: first, the interests of the proletarian
struggle of one country must be subordinate to the interests of the
proletarian struggle of the world, and second, the nation which has
defeated the bourgeoisie must make the greatest national sacrifice with
power and determination for the overthrow of international capitalists."
<a id="5">[[5]](#bot_5)</a> In his struggle
with modern revisionism and with the revisionist line of "making peace
with isms and reducing aid to international revolutionary struggles"
<a id="6">[[6]](#bot_6)</a> advocated by the
Liu Shao-ch'i and Lin Piao clique, Chairman Mao repeatedly educated the
whole Party and the people of the whole country with the proletarian
internationalist spirit. Chairman Mao said: "People who have attained
victory in their revolution should assist the people who are struggling
for liberation. This is our internationalist obligation."
<a id="7">[[7]](#bot_7)</a> We must follow
Chairman Mao's teaching, resolutely support the just struggles of the
peoples of the world, and honestly fulfill our internationalist
obligation.

### _Only the Socialist State Provides Genuine Foreign Economic Aid_

Under the guidance of the principle of proletarian internationalism, the
economic relations among the socialist states are relations of mutual
aid. They provide aid to one another, strictly respect the sovereignty
of the recipient countries, attach no strings, and do not ask for
privileges. They genuinely help the recipient country to rely on the
strength of its own people, exploit its national resources and
potential, gradually establish and develop an independent socialist
economic system according to its own characteristics, and advance hand
in hand on the socialist road.

At the same time, the socialist state also tries to develop economic
relations with the nationalist states according to the principle of
proletarian internationalism. As a result of a prolonged period of
colonial rule, a lopsided "monocultural economy" has been established in
the nationalist countries. Based on the concrete conditions of these
countries, the socialist country first of all does its best to help them
develop a diversified agriculture which aims at satisfying domestic
needs, gradually altering their dependence on imports of major
agricultural products and making their national economies develop
healthily on the basis of gradually strengthening agriculture.

The socialist state also helps the nationalist countries establish the
light industry necessary to free them from dependence on imports of the
necessities for people's livelihood.

The socialist state also helps the nationalist countries use their own
resources to establish integrated industrial branches for everything
from raw materials to finished goods (including heavy industrial
branches) and actively helps these countries to advance on the road of
independence and self-reliance by gradually sweeping away the economic
aggression of imperialism and new or old colonialism.

In sum, foreign economic aid by the socialist state is an important
factor in coordinating the international political struggle. It stands
up against the strong and assists the weak, strengthens the
world revolutionary forces, and opposes the policy of aggression and war
adopted by the imperialists and social imperialists.

Based on the doctrine of proletarian internationalism, the Chinese
government announced in 1964 and later repeatedly affirmed eight
principles for China's foreign economic aid:

1\. Provide foreign aid according to the principle of equality and mutual
benefit. Do not regard aid as a one-way gift. Regard aid as mutual
assistance.

2\. In providing foreign aid, strictly respect the sovereignty of the
recipient country. Attach no strings and ask for no privileges.

3\. Provide economic aid without interest or at low interests. When
necessary, lengthen the period of loan repayment to lessen the burden on
the recipient country.

4\. The purpose of aid is not to create the recipient country's
dependence on China but to help it to advance on the road of
self-reliance and independent economic development.

5\. Projects chosen for aid in the recipient country should require low
investment and short gestation so that the aid recipient country can
increase its income and accumulation.

6\. Provide the best possible equipment and raw materials we produce and
negotiate prices according to the international market conditions. If
the equipment and raw materials provided do not meet the agreed
specifications and quality, their return is guaranteed.

7\. In providing any form of technical aid, guarantee that the personnel
of the recipient country will fully master this technical know-how.

8\. Experts sent to the recipient country to help with construction
should receive the same material treatment as the experts of the
recipient country. No special requirements or treatment are allowed.

The above eight principles for foreign aid announced by our government
are the concrete embodiment of Chairman Mao's proletarian revolutionary
diplomatic line in foreign aid work. They are also a summary of the
practical experience of China's foreign aid work.

Since the founding of the People's Republic, China has been
pursuing the above eight principles for foreign economic aid. According
to the needs of friendly countries, entire construction projects and
general material resources have been provided and have been well
received by the peoples of recipient countries in Asia, Africa, and
Latin America. Take the example of the Tanzania-Zambia Railway currently
under construction. It starts from Dar es Salaam, the capital of
Tanzania, and heads west across the wide plains of Tanzania and Zambia
to Kapiri M'poshi in Zambia, connecting with Lusaka, the capital. The
total length is about 2,000 kilometers. Along this railway are high
mountains, deep gorges, rivers, and swamps. The terrain is treacherous,
the project huge, the investment high, and the difficulty immense. But
it plays a vital role in developing the national economies of Tanzania
and Zambia. In its construction, the workers and technicians of
Tanzania, Zambia, and China share their joys and tribulations, fight
together, and are establishing a deep and sincere friendship. The
peoples of Tanzania and Zambia fondly call this railway under
construction "the road of friendship."

Soon after the People's Republic was founded, the Chinese people began
to discharge their obligation with regard to foreign economic aid. With
the development of China's economic construction and the increase in our
economic strength, the size and scope of our foreign aid have gradually
expanded. But, China is still a developing socialist state. The support
provided to the peoples of various countries by China is mainly
political and moral. The economic aid that can be provided by us is
extremely limited. With the vigorous development of China's socialist
revolution and socialist construction, it is certain that we will be
able to reduce this inadequacy and contribute more to the progressive
enterprise of mankind.

[Actively Develop the Socialist State's Foreign Trade](#)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### _There Are New Characteristics in the Foreign Trade of the Socialist State_

Foreign trade belongs to the category of commodity circulation. It is
commodity exchange between two countries. Differences in
social systems also lead to differences in the nature of foreign trade.
Under the capitalist system, foreign trade has always served as a means
to augment capital. In the imperialist period, commodity export was
closely related to capital export. Foreign trade became an important
means by which the monopoly capitalist clique launched economic
aggression, seizing high monopoly profits and competing for world
hegemony.

The Chinese people are deeply familiar with imperialist economic
aggression and plunder. In the more than one hundred years between the
Opium War of 1840 and the founding of a new China in 1949, the
imperialist countries, by forcing the unequal treaties on the Chinese
people, seized a series of privileges such as dumping commodities and
export capital in China. They colluded with Chinese bureaucratic
capital, represented by the four clans of Chiang, Sung, Kung, and Ch'en,
to engage in cruel exploitation and plundering, buying cheap
agricultural and subsidiary products and mineral ores and selling
expensive industrial products. Consequently, the foreign trade of old
China was an important channel through which the blood and sweat of the
Chinese people were sucked by imperialism and its lackeys.

The foreign trade of the socialist state is completely different from
the foreign trade of imperialist and social-imperialist countries. It is
a new form of foreign trade. The foreign trade of the socialist country
is built on the basis of socialist public ownership of the means of
production. The development of foreign trade in countries under
proletarian dictatorship is favorable to accelerating socialist
revolution and socialist construction and to supporting world
revolution.

The foreign trade of the socialist state has the following
characteristics:

First, the foreign trade of the socialist state is an independent
foreign trade controlled by a state under proletarian dictatorship.

The state under proletarian dictatorship, in order to facilitate the
building of socialism and defend national independence, must exercise
state control over foreign trade. Chairman Mao pointed out on the eve of
national liberation that "the recovery and development of the national
economy of the People's Republic will not be possible
without a policy of control over foreign trade."
<a id="8">[[8]](#bot_8)</a> After liberation,
the Chinese government implemented Chairman Mao's revolutionary policy,
expelled imperialist economic aggression, annulled the privileges
enjoyed by imperialism in China, got back control over the customs
administration, and terminated the control of foreign merchants over
China's foreign trade. At the same time, the Chinese government
confiscated the foreign trade business of bureaucratic capital,
gradually transformed the import and export business of medium and petty
capitalists, and fundamentally transformed the semicolonial nature of
the foreign trade of old China. The foreign trade of China has become an
independent foreign trade controlled by a state under proletarian
dictatorship.

State control over foreign trade plays an important role in guaranteeing
the political and economic independence of China, defending China from
imperialist economic aggression, minimizing the effects of economic
crises from the capitalist world, and accelerating the pace of China's
socialist construction through normal commercial exchanges with many
countries of the world on the basis of equality and mutual benefit.

Second, the foreign trade of the socialist state is a foreign trade of
equality and mutual benefit under the guidance of Marxism.

The foreign trade of the socialist state is an important aspect of the
foreign activities of the socialist state. In its foreign trade
relations, the socialist state thoroughly implements the principle of
equality and mutual benefit and the principle of exchanging what one has
for what one does not have, requires mutual respect for each other's
sovereignty and aspirations, matches each other's needs and
possibilities, and makes all efforts to maintain fair and reasonable
prices.

Chairman Mao pointed out: "We must endeavor to do business first with
the socialist countries and the people's democratic countries as well as
with the capitalist countries."
<a id="9">[[9]](#bot_9)</a> We
must carry on planned commercial exchanges among the socialist countries
under the guidance of the principle of proletarian internationalism and
according to the spirit of active cooperation and no nonsense. We must
also continuously expand trade and mutual exchanges with the countries
of the Third World whenever necessary and possible in order to promote
the common development of our national economies on the basis of
selfreliance. We support the developing countries in improving the terms
of trade for their raw materials, primary products, and finished
products and in setting fair and profitable prices. We support them in
establishing organizations among rawmaterials-exporting countries and in
carrying on a united struggle against colonialism, imperialism, and
hegemony. We must also develop commercial exchanges with the capitalist
countries according to needs, possibilities, and conditions. Chairman
Mao pointed out: "The people who prevent us from trading with foreign
countries and establishing diplomatic relations with foreign countries
are none other than the imperialists and their lackeys, the Chiang
Kai-shek reactionaries. Once we invite all domestic and international
forces to smash the internal and external reactionary clique, we can
then do business, and we can establish diplomatic relations with all
countries on the basis of equality, mutual benefit, and respect for each
others' te rritorial integrity."
<a id="10">[[10]](#bot_10)</a> Therefore, we
must soberly realize that commercial exchanges with the imperialist and
social imperialist countries are fraught with struggles.

In the world market and in commercial exchanges with the capitalist
countries, the socialist state must fight for fair and reasonable prices
for imports and exports. This is a class struggle between the
proletariat and the bourgeoisie in the international economic arena. The
domestic market of the socialist state is different from the foreign
capitalist market. Prices of export commodities should be flexibly
determined according to the needs of diplomatic policy and changes in
the international market. Only in this way can the export commodities of
the socialist state be sold at suitable prices. On the issue of prices,
we oppose confusing the two types of markets which are different in
nature, by transferring price oscillations from foreign to domestic
market and thereby affecting price stability in the domestic market; or
by applying stable price policy of domestic market to
foreign market, thereby inflicting unnecessary losses on the wealth
created by our working people.

Third, the foreign trade of the socialist state is planned, centralized
foreign trade under state management.

Centralized leadership and a unified external policy are the basic
principles of the socialist state's foreign trade. Firm adherence to the
principles of centralized leadership and unified external policy means
that, according to the varieties of commodity, we must make rational
division of labor and management, and bring into play both central and
local activism on the basis of "unified understanding, unified policy,
centralized planning, centralized command, and unified action."

A planned and centralized foreign trade is a manifestation of the
superiority of the socialist system over the capitalist system. The
private ownership system and the chaotic production conditions of
capitalism determine the blind and competitive nature of capitalist
foreign trade. The planned and proportional development of the socialist
national economy objectively requires that foreign trade must be planned
and must be conducted according to the state's import and export needs
and capabilities and according to the national economic plan formulated
by the state. The foreign trade of the socialist state grows with the
development of the national economy. It also actively promotes the
development of the whole national economy.

### _Develop Foreign Trade on the Basis of Independence and Self-Reliance_

The foreign trade of the socialist state plays an active role in the
development of the socialist economy. However, a rapid, planned, and
proportional development of the socialist economy does not depend on the
foreign market, but on the superiority of the socialist system and the
planned economy and on the diligent struggle of the laboring people in
the country. Independence and selfreliance constitute a basic policy of
the socialist state in conducting economic construction. It is also a
policy that must be strictly followed in foreign trade.

To develop foreign trade on the basis of independence and
self-reliance requires a correct understanding and handling of the
relationship between production and foreign trade. The relationship
between foreign trade and production is one between circulation and
production. The development of socialist production is the material
basis of the expansion of foreign trade. Since the relationship between
foreign trade and production is one between circulation and production,
only by greatly promoting the development of industrial and agricultural
production can there be adequate supplies of exports and can there be
more imports of needed materials. The internal linkage between
circulation and production requires the foreign trade branches to go
deep down to the forefront of industrial and agricultural production, be
concerned with production, and promote production. They must strengthen
investigation and research on foreign markets, actively introduce new
foreign technology, new samples, new equipment and superior varieties to
the production units, and raise new production problems in order to
establish a mutually supporting and promoting relation.

To develop foreign trade on the basis of independence and self-reliance
also requires a correct understanding and handling of the relationship
between domestic trade and foreign trade. Foreign trade and domestic
trade both belong to the circulation sphere. Their basic goals are
identical, namely, to satisfy the needs of the socialist state and the
people. Of course, there are also some contradictions based on the
identical goals. For example, although there has been substantial
development in China's industry, there are often contradictions in the
allocation of goods between domestic trade and foreign trade because of
the excess of demand over supply due to the weakness of the original
foundation. To increase exports requires a corresponding reduction in
the supply to domestic trade. However, the needed means of production
that can be purchased as a result of exports help increase accumulation
and expand reproduction. Therefore, this is really a contradiction
between accumulation and consumption and between long-term interests and
shortterm interests. The correct handling of the relationship between
domestic and foreign trade must start from the needs of
national construction and the people's livelihood and must be based on
the domestic market. At the same time, the importance of foreign markets
should not be overlooked and must be taken into account through suitable
arrangements. All commodities that vitally affect the national economy
and the people's livelihood must first be used to satisfy domestic
needs, and their exports should be controlled according to the state
plan. The domestic trade in commodities which are only marginally
related to the people's livelihood should be suitably reduced, and their
exports increased. Some commodities are quite dispensable for the
people's livelihood, and they should be exported as much as possible.
There are other commodities which are valueless if discarded but
valuable if collected. Their supplies should be expanded for exports.

The traitor clique of Liu Shao-ch'i and Lin Piao strongly advocated
putting "foreign exchange in command" on the foreign trade battlefront
in a vain attempt to basically transform the political orientation of
the foreign trade of the socialist state and to convert China into an
economic satellite of imperialism. This is the road that the socialist
state will never follow.

### _Fully Exercise the Active Role of the Socialist State's Foreign Trade_

The foreign trade of the socialist state is a component of the socialist
economy. It is also a tool for foreign contacts. To develop foreign
trade in a planned manner and to exercise fully its active role helps
strengthen our own country's capacity for self-reliance, thereby
accelerating socialist construction, and helps strengthen the friendship
among the people of various countries, thereby promoting the world
revolution.

As a matter of fact, there is no single country in the world that can
produce all it desires. On the basis of a firm adherence to the policy
of independence and self-reliance in developing the socialist economy,
the socialist state can and should use foreign trade as a means to
regulate the proportional relations in socialist expanded
reproduction. Through foreign trade, certain badly needed materials can
be imported to make up for temporary shortages of certain products and
materials resulting from production conditions and natural conditions.
Through foreign trade, some advanced technology can be introduced to
serve as a model for catching up, thereby facilitating technical
innovation in industrial and agricultural production.

To develop foreign trade in a planned way helps accelerate socialist
construction. However, we cannot therefore give up the policy of
independence and self-reliance. A handful of traitors, from Tseng
Kuo-fan and Li Hung-chang in the Ch'ing dynasty to Liu Shao-ch'i and Lin
Piao in the contemporary period, were all advocates of a slavish
attitude toward foreign things. They always criticized the inadequacies
of China's proletariat and laboring people. Only the Western bourgeoisie
made the grade. In foreign trade, they always advocated a total
dependence on imports. "Even the moon is rounder overseas." China's
laboring people are diligent, courageous, and intelligent. Since
liberation, China's laboring people have become masters of the socialist
state, and their intelligence and talent have exploded forth all the
more. Whatever the Western bourgeoisie can do, the Chinese proletariat,
too, can do. Even what the Western bourgeoisie cannot do, the Chinese
proletariat can do. The vain attempt of the anti-Party clique of Lin
Piao to depend on Soviet revisionist social imperialism by way of
surrender and betrayal merely reflected the degenerate spiritual state
of the exploitative class in China. In the sphere of foreign trade,
China's proletariat consistently adheres to Chairman Mao's policy of
independence and self-reliance, continuously criticizes the
counterrevolutionary revisionist line of Liu Shao-ch'i and Lin Piao
which worships things foreign and adopts a slavish attitude toward
foreign things. "We should never tie the fate of socialist construction
to the waist of another person!" This is the answer from the broad
masses of workers.

The development of trade relations among the socialist countries on the
basis of equality and mutual benefit can promote a rapid development of
each other's economy and continuously strengthen the
anti-imperialist and antirevisionist forces. The trade contacts between
the socialist states and the nationalist states help develop independent
national economies and oppose the policy of aggressive expansion of the
two superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union. The trade
contacts between the socialist states and the capitalist states help
expand the international anti-imperialist united front and oppose the
struggle for hegemony between the two superpowers, the United States and
the Soviet Union. Therefore, the foreign trade of the socialist state is
also a means of thoroughly implementing the proletarian diplomatic line.

Since the founding of the People's Republic, under the guidance of
Chairman Mao's revolutionary line, China's foreign trade has promoted
the development of industrial and agricultural production, expanded
China's external influence, and supported the world revolution. Great
achievements have been made. From now on, any further development of
foreign trade will help us better implement proletarian
internationalism, accelerate domestic socialist construction, and better
support the world revolution.

### _Major Study References_

Marx, "A Speech on Free Trade," _Selected Works of Marx and
Engels_, Vol. 1.

Lenin, "A Draft Outline on the Issue of Nations and Colonies."

Lenin, "On the Monopoly System of Foreign Trade," _Complete Works of
Lenin_, Vol. 33.

Chairman Mao, "Report to the Second Plenum of the Seventh Central
Committee of the Chinese Communist Party."

### _Review Problems_

1\. Why must the external economic relations of the socialist state be
subordinate to the proletarian revolutionary diplomatic line" What is
the reactionary nature of Soviet revisionist external economic
relations?

2\. Why do we say that the foreign economic aid of the
socialist state must fulfill the internationalist obligation?

3\. What are the characteristics of the socialist state's foreign trade?

_Notes_
-------------------

<a id="bot_s_a">[\*](#s_a)</a> Hsiang-hu yuan-chu, hu-t'ung yu-wu ---
she-hui-chu-i kuochia ti tui-wai ching-chi kuan-hsi.

<a id="bot_1">[[1]](#1)</a> _Jen-min jih-pao_ _(People's
Daily)_, November 7, 1957.

<a id="bot_2">[[2]](#2)</a> "On the Correct Handling of Contradictions
among the People," _Selected Readings from the Works of Mao
Tse-tung_, Part 1, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1965, pp. 363-64.

<a id="bot_3">[[3]](#3)</a> "On the Ridicule of Marxism and 'Imperialist
Economism,'" _Complete Works of Lenin_, Vol. 23, p. 26.

<a id="bot_4">[[4]](#4)</a> "On the People's Democratic Dictatorship,"
_Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung_, Vol. 4, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1968, pp. 1362-1363.

<a id="bot_5">[[5]](#5)</a> "A Draft Outline on the Issue of Nations and
Colonies," _Selected Works of Lenin_, Vol. 4, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1972, p. 274.

<a id="bot_6">[[6]](#6)</a> Namely, "peace" with imperialism, modern
revisionism, and the reactionaries of various countries and "less" aid
to the just struggles of the revolutionary peoples of various countries.

<a id="bot_7">[[7]](#7)</a> Quoted from _Jen-min jih-pao_
_(People's Daily)_, August 9, 1963.

<a id="bot_8">[[8]](#8)</a> "Report to the Second Plenum of the Seventh
Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party," _Selected Works of
Mao Tse-tung_, Vol. 4, Jen-min ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 1323.

<a id="bot_9">[[9]](#9)</a> Ibid., p. 1325.

<a id="bot_10">[[10]](#10)</a> "On the People's Democratic Dictatorship,"
_Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung_, Vol. 4, Jen-min
ch'u-pan-she, 1968, p. 1362.
